===========================
ZX81-FORTH ROM for the ZX81
Skywave Software
===========================


                          Sinclair
                         ZX81-FORTH
                            ROM
                     with Multi-Tasking

                             BY
                       SKYWAVE SOFTWARE

                    (C) 1983 DAVID HUSBAND


Table of Contents

1.0  Introduction
     1.1  Introduction to ZX81-FORTH
2.0  Installation and System Description
     2.1  Installing the EPROM.
     2.2  Initial Power-up.
     2.3  Warm and Cold Restart.
     2.4  System response & errors.
3.0  Visual Editor
     3.1  Editor Commands.
     3.2  Compilation of code.
     3.3  Creating Screens.
     3.4  SLOW, FAST and AUTO.
4.0  Mass Storage and Retrieval
     4.1  Information Storage.
     4.2  Information Retrieval.
     4.3  Compiling Screens with Loading.
     4.4  Loading Sequential Screens.
5.0  Structure and Command Description
     5.1  Stack Structure.
     5.2  The dictionary and its use.
     5.3  Command format.
6.0  Mathematical commands
7.0  Logical operators & Comparison
     7.1  Logical Operators.
     7.2  Comparison Operators.
8.0  Number Bases & Stack Manipulation
     8.1  Number Bases.
     8.2  Stack Manipulation.
9.0  Memory Commands & Memory Manipulation
10.0 Data Types and Variables
     10.1 Data Types.
     10.2 Variable.
     10.3 Integer.
11.0 Control Structures
12.0 Character Input/Output
     12.1 Character Stack.
     12.2 Character Commands.
     12.3 Character/Number Stack.
     12.4 Character Comparison.
     12.5 Keyboard Allocations.
13.0 The Printer
14.0 Defining Words
     14.1 Colon / Semi-colon.
     14.2 <BUILDS ... DOES>.
     14.3 Operating System Words.
15.0 TIME & the System Clock
16.0 Tasking
17.0 CODE  Compiler
18.0 Applications
19.0 Final Comments
     19.1 Any Problems ?
     19.2 Acknowledgements
     19.3 Copies
20.0 Memory Map
     Appendix A  --  The System Variables


1.1  Introduction

The manual is intended as a guide to the use of ZX81-FORTH, and assumes that the
user will use it in conjunction with a book on FORTH. We recommend the book
"The Complete FORTH" by Alan Winfield, which is available from most booksellers
or in case of difficulty from us for £6.95 + £1.00 postage and packing. Where
possible, ZX81-FORTH matches the fig-FORTH commands, although ZX81-FORTH is not
fig-FORTH. It was not possible to include all the fig-FORTH words because of ROM
space limitations. ZX81-FORTH also contains some non-standard words so that
multi-tasking can be accomplished.

ZX81-FORTH is  multi-tasking. This gives the programmer the ability to write
real-time routines as is described in section 14.

ZX81-FORTH is, we believe, an improvement on the fig standard in some ways by
making ZX81-FORTH a compiler directive language instead of interpretive.
Interpretive FORTH contains a series of addresses for each word, these being
linked together by an inner- interpreter. The inner interpreter consists of an
address threader using about 13 bytes and some other routines taking the total
to about 70 bytes. The inner-interpreter requires 170 T-states of execution time
(~50uS) on a Z80. This inner-interpreter is a routine which must run as overhead
for every address interpreted. A compiler directive language contains a series
of calls to subroutines in each command or word. Therefore, the overhead of the
inner interpreter is not necessary. The result is that compiler directive FORTH
is about three times faster than interpretive FORTH in most programming
applications.

Since ZX81-FORTH is not an interpretive language but instead is a compiler
directive language, it should  not  really  be  classified as a TIL
(Threaded Interpretive Language), but instead it would be better to call the
language a Threaded Compiler Language.

ZX81-FORTH contains most of the standard fig-FORTH words. The language of FORTH
is a structured programming language which allows the user to manage and
manipulate all of the dynamic memory addressable by the microprocessor. FORTH is
also a language in which the user can link down to machine code routines and in
this respect, FORTH is only a step above assembly level programming. FORTH is
however, a high-level user friendly language in that it allows the user to create
his own command set. The entire program set written in FORTH is a customised set
of instructions and in this way approaches other high-level languages.

In addition to the standard attributes of the FORTH language,ZX81-FORTH adds
extra flexibility with its multi-tasking. Multi- tasking allows the user to
schedule programs to run at any time in the future. This is a feature available
only on much more expensive systems. With the proper hardware, such as plenty of
I/O, a multi-tasking system can be used as a real-time controller. This means
that the computer can operate at a speed sufficient enough to control the
environment as events occur. A multi-tasking system could be used to enter data
from a real-time environment. An example would be sampling the breathing cycle
of a patient in a hospital in order to determine his or her respiratory rate. A
multi-tasking system also gives the user the flexibility of allowing a program to
run in the background (it is possible to run one program in the background while
editing another in the foreground).

FORTH is somewhat harder to learn than BASIC, however the flexibility gained with
FORTH makes it a desirable programming language for most, if not, all programming
tasks.

ZX81-FORTH is also very, very fast. Try this test :

In BASIC this program takes over 5 minutes (in SLOW mode)

10 FOR I=0 TO 30000
20 NEXT I

The nearest equivalent in ZX81-FORTH takes about 4 seconds in SLOW, and less than
1 second in AUTO. Try it yourself.

AUTO 30000 0 DO LOOP

That makes ZX81-FORTH, for this example, about 300 times faster than ZX-81 BASIC !!


2.0  Installation and System Description

2.1  Installing the EPROM

DAVID HUSBAND sells the ZX81-FORTH ROM as a 'fit it yourself' conversion or as a
ready converted computer. Those with the ready converted unit should skip this
section and go to section 2.2 Initial power up.

Take the cover off the computer. There are five screws in the bottom of the case.
(Three are under the pads; the pads are glued on and are easily removed.)

After removing the screws, the two halves of the case are easily separated.
Opening the case will reveal the underside of the printed circuit board. Remove
the top two screws in this board. Next, flip the circuit board over making sure
that the ribbon cable to the keyboard does not pull out.

At this point you should be looking at the various integrated circuits on the
board. Identify the BASIC ROM chip. You can find a picture of this circuit board
in your Sinclair Manual. It is on either page 119 or page 162. The picture on
page 162 is not of the issue 3 pcb.

Remove the BASIC ROM with great care. If it is soldered in, use a hot soldering
iron and an efficient solder-sucker. Clear the unused 4 holes because we will use
all 28 pins. Replace the BASIC ROM with the 28-pin I.C. Socket provided, taking
care to put it in carefully. Finally plug in the EPROM supplied, with the correct
orientation.

If the EPROM supplied is a 2564, it will have a couple of its pins modified to
take  into account the non-standard signals on the 28-pin BASIC ROM socket.

If the EPROM supplied is a 2764, it will be mounted on a small PCB with 24 pins
which are a direct replacement for the BASIC ROM. It may be necessary to replace
the IC socket with the one supplied by us, as the original IC Socket may not be
able to take the header pins of the PCB.

Next, turn the Sinclair circuit board over and secure it with the two screws you
removed previously. Then, replace the cover and insert the five screws previously
removed from the holes in the cover. At this point ZX81-FORTH will be operational
(note that no BASIC will be available in this configuration.)


2.2  Initial Power-up

After completing section 2.1, or having purchased a ready converted computer, the
system is ready for power-up. This section will describe for you how the various
screens in ZX81- FORTH should look when you first turn the power on. After
inserting the power line on the computer the screen should look like figure 2.5.
If the screen did not come up, insert the power line again. You could also try a
cold restart. This is done by holding the SHIFT key and the SPACE key down
simultaneously for about half a second.

Here are some possible reasons why your screen did not come up properly:

- Did you correctly install the 28-pin socket after removing the BASIC ROM ?

- Did you correctly insert the ZX81-FORTH ROM in the 28-pin socket ?

- Did you bend any of the circuit board pins over during installation ?

- Is your RAM Pack attached properly ? If the connections are not good, the
  system will not display the video information. It is best to remove the RAM
  Pack (if you have a 2k system) and power-up again.

    +--------------------------------+
    | ZX81-FORTH BY DAVID HUSBAND    |
    | COPYRIGHT (C) 1983             |
    |                                |
    | #                              |
    |                                |
    |                                |
    |                                |
    |                                |
    |                                |
    |                                |
    |                                |
    |                                |
    +--------------------------------+
    Screen upon power-up or COLD restart.
                 Figure 2.5          

There are two sets of screens in ZX81-FORTH, the first one we have seen. The
second one is a split screen. To display the split screen, hold down the SHIFT
and EDIT keys simultaneously. Now the screen should appear as shown in
Figure 2.6.

    +--------------------------------+
    | #                              |
    |                                |
    | This is the editor part of the |
    | screen.It is referred to as ED |
    | in the software.               |
    |                                |
    | ############################## |
    |                                |
    | This is the run-time part of   |
    | the screen. It is referred to  |
    | as CO or console in the        |
    | software                       |
    |                                |
    +--------------------------------+
             EDITOR SCREEN
                Fig 2.6

You can toggle between the two parts of the screen by using the SHIFT/EDIT keys.

To ensure that your system is working correctly, type the following commands:-

VLIST (NEW LINE)     This will display all of the ZX81-FORTH words presently in 
                     memory.

.CPU (NEW LINE)      This identifies the type of processor which is presently
                     running. (A Z80)


2.3  Warm and Cold Restarts

ZX81-FORTH can be re-initialised from software any time without having to pull
out the power supply lead.

WARM RESTART:  WARM (NEW LINE)     will execute a warm start.

A warm restart can also be performed by holding BREAK (SHIFT/SPACE) down for
an instant.

A warm restart resets the stack pointer to the absolute bottom. The system then
checks for a catastrophic error such as an over-write of the system variables. If
necessary, a warm restart calls a cold restart to recover. The editor is reset to
the CONSOLE screen. Finally, if the task flag is off (command TOFF) any
background task is set to a null program and all tasks are LOCKED.

COLD RESTART:  COLD (NEW LINE)     A cold restart is performed by holding the
                                   BREAK key down for about half a second.

A cold restart configures the entire system and brings up the original screen, as
if the power had just been turned on. All working memory (RAM > 4000H) is erased.
Cold restart also checks for the amount of RAM attached to the Sinclair and
stores this value in a system variable.

Also a cold restart checks to see if there is RAM or ROM at address 2000 Hex
(8k Decimal). If it finds RAM  this is linked into the system and the dictionary
starts at 2000 instead of 4000 Hex. If ROM is found, a header pattern is searched
for and if found, the ROM is regarded as being more dictionary and linked into
the system. An extension ROM will be available, and a Technical Manual will be
issued so that the user can create his own extension ROM to hold his favourite
applications. The user may notice that there are some un-documented words already
in the dictionary especially to handle the extension ROM.


2.4  System Response & Errors

ZX81-FORTH prompts the user with an OK after each successful operation in the
execution screen. The operation may be as simple as putting a number onto the
stack, or as complicated as an entire line of program. As long as no error is
found, the system reports with an OK.

If some error should occur during an operation, an ERROR statement will be
displayed on the screen followed by an error code. The error codes are as
follows:-

ERROR F    This error message is displayed when the user attempts to forget a
           FENCEd word. A FENCEd word appears anywhere in the list of words being
           forgotten this error will be displayed.

* ERROR H  This error message will be flagged if the user attempts to enter a
           token which cannot be interpreted as a hexadecimal number or is not
           found in the Dictionary.

ERROR M    This error message is displayed when the available usable memory (RAM)
           is almost full. An error M will occur when the user program area runs
           to within 32 bytes of the parameter stack.

ERROR R    Error R stands for redundant. If the user tries to define a word with
           the same name which belongs to a program already in the dictionary,
           an error R will be flagged. The word or task you are defining will
           still be defined but will have priority over the previous word in the
           dictionary and the word or task already defined will no longer be
           accessible to the programmer.

* ERROR S  This message is displayed if the parameter stack pointer underflows,
           something which should never happen since popping undefined
           information off the stack is a no-no.

* ERROR U  Error U stands for Undefined word. This message is displayed when a
           word is used in a definition and either does not convert properly
           into a number or is not found in the dictionary. (This is only
           followed by a warm restart if it is found in the middle of a
           definition).

*  NOTE:  These errors will generate a warm restart after their display.


3.0  The Editor

ZX81-FORTH uses ASCII characters. This is a deviation from the Sinclair BASIC. It
uses its own, non-standard, character set. Using ASCII makes the system much
more flexible in terms of communicating with existing computer systems (most of
which use ASCII to communicate to modems and printers).

The visual editor is a screen editor, not a line editor. This gives the user a
great deal of flexibility in writing FORTH programs.

ZX81-FORTH uses two screen areas, so don't be confused. The first screen appears
when you turn on the power. (See fig 2.5). The second screen is displayed with
the SHIFT/EDIT set of keys. Once you are in the second screen (Fig 2.6) you can
use the top part of the screen for editing. The lower part is an execution
screen. (This will be called the console.) The two parts are separated by a black
band called the video pad. You can switch between edit and execution screens
using the SHIFT/EDIT keys.


3.1  Editor Commands

Note:  If you hold any key down for more than a second, the depressed key will
repeat.

    SHIFT/<    Moves the cursor one space left.
    SHIFT/v    Moves the cursor one line down.
    SHIFT/^    Moves the cursor one line up.
    SHIFT/>    Moves the cursor one space right.
    SHIFT/9    Inserts a line at the cursor position.
    SHIFT/4    Deletes the line at the cursor position.
    SHIFT/0    Deletes the character at cursor position.

On the editor screen, pressing NEW LINE moves the cursor down one line and does
not compile that line. Continued typing on a line will provide immediate
wraparound onto the next line should you type beyond the end of the screen.
However, if you go back and insert characters in full lines, they will not
wraparound. Instead the characters will be lost off the right side of the screen.

The insertion mode is automatic. Typing a character in the middle of a line moves
all the characters following the cursor to the right.

The following commands deal with the video pad.

    SHIFT/3    Takes the cursor line and stores it in the Pad.
    SHIFT/2    Takes the contents of the Pad and puts them at the cursor
               position, moving the other lines below, downwards.


3.2  Compilation of Code

The following commands deal with the compilation of code from the editor screen.
There are two ways to write code in ZX81-FORTH. The first is to enter commands
one by one in the console screen. (The console screen is described in Section 2).
The more desirable method of writing code is to write a series of words in the
editor screen and then either compile the entire screen or compile the lines one
by one. This allows you the freedom to go back and change things in the editor
screen and recompile.

    SHIFT/Q    Compiles the line of code at the cursor position, and the compiled
               line then appears in the execution screen.

A FORTH word may be more than one line long. In this case you will have to place
the cursor on the top line, compile it, and then move the cursor to compile the
rest of the line. Do not worry about the compiler, it will wait until it finds a
semicolon (;) before it assumes that the end of a FORTH word is reached.

If the line is successfully compiled, an OK will appear at the end of the line.
If the line does not compile properly due to a programming error, then ERROR will
be displayed followed by the appropriate code. The error codes are explained in
Section 2.4.

    CPL        Compiles the entire editor screen.

Use this command after you have filled the entire editor screen and wish to
compile all the statements. This is also very useful for compiling screens after
they have been downloaded from the cassette tape.

You do not have to write all of your code in the editor screen and then compile
it. You can compile FORTH code line by line in either Screen 1 (fig 2.5) or in
the execution portion of Screen 2 (fig 2.6). Each word that you type while on the
execution screen is compiled immediately. It is for this reason that using the
editor to hold uncompiled (or source) code is desirable. You can make changes in
the middle of a program before it is too late to change it.

The editor screen can be turned off in order to make the present screen only an
execution screen.

    EOFF        Turns the editor screen off.

The editor screen can be turned back on again by using the SHIFT/EDIT key.


3.3  Creating Screens

Any number of screens can be created using the screen command. A screen is a
portion of the video display in which characters can be placed. You can have as
many screens as you wish and they can be any rectangular size, ranging from one
character by one character to as large as the screen itself. If a screen is
defined outside the bounds of the video display, the screen will be defined in
RAM outside the bounds of FD00H to FFFFH (Video RAM).

The definition of a screen is as follows:

a b c d SCREEN name

    a = column number of upper left hand corner.
    b = row number of upper left hand corner
    c = column number of lower right hand corner.
    d = row number of lower right hand corner.
    name = this can be any screen name desired by the user.

    0 0 15 15 SCREEN S1 (NEW LINE)     This command will create a screen starting
                                       in row 1, col 1 and continuing to row 16,
                                       col 16.

To display something on this screen, type:

    " HELLO THERE " S1 .W  (NEW LINE)
    OK

Screens are defined in the dictionary, so they can be disabled by FORGETting them
just as you would forget any FORTH word.

    FORGET S1      (NEW LINE)    would disable screen S1

Every screen has a name and this name serves as an identifier which must be used
with certain commands that deal with different screens. Some of these words are
REV, .W, .C, and will be discussed in later sections of this manual.

When you power-up, two screens are already defined. The dominant screen is the
console screen or execution screen and it has an identifier of CO. The editor
screen which is enabled by SHIFT/EDIT has an identifier of ED. To use words which
direct output to different screens use these identifiers.

    CO          Console screen identifier.
    ED          Editor screen identifier.


3.4  Fast, Slow, Auto

ZX81-FORTH still accepts the SLOW and FAST commands as does Sinclair's BASIC. In
FAST mode, the video display is turned off until the CPU finishes processing the
program. In SLOW mode, the video display always remains on but only 20% of the
processing time is used to execute the program, the other 80% is used to update
the display.

The individual keys no longer initiate SLOW and FAST commands, instead you must
type them out letter by letter.

ZX81-FORTH also supports the command AUTO. AUTO will interrupt the video display
if the processor requires more than 1/4 second to execute a program.

It is possible to make any screen reverse video. The word REV along with the
screen identifier is used to toggle the screen from reverse video to normal
or vice versa.

    CO REV      will make the console screen reverse video.
    ED REV      will make the editor screen reverse video.

REV    Executed after a screen identifier to reverse the dominant background
field. (reverse video or normal video).


4.0  Mass Storage and Retrieval

4.1  Storage

ZX81-FORTH allows for the storage of screens or a series of screens on magnetic
cassette tape. The whole editor screen will be saved, therefore make sure that
only the information you want to save appears on that screen.

Both LOAD and STORE will temporarily stop video output to the screen. The timing
required to store or load screens requires all of the processor time, and because
no interrupts are issued during the cassette routine, all tasking is suspended.

Storage takes place from the editor screen. (This is the portion of the video
display above the black band as shown in fig.2.6). Each screen is loaded with an
identifying number. You should take care to remember which number a specific
screen is, so that if a large number of screens are stored on a tape each one
will not have to be viewed to find the information you want.

Simplest cases:

Fill the editor screen with any information which you desire.

After you are finished go to the execution screen (type SHIFT/EDIT).

Such a screen might look like this:

    +----------------------------------+
    | THIS SCREEN WILL BE AN EXAMPLE   |
    | SHOWING HOW ONE MIGHT STORE      |
    | INFORMATION ON TO THE TAPE. NOTE |
    | THAT THIS SCREEN DOES NOT HAVE   |
    | TO BE A PROGRAM. A SCREEN IS     |
    | 512 BYTES OF INFORMATION. YOU    |
    | CAN STORE ANY SECTION OF MEMORY  |
    | BY MOVING IT TO THE VIDEO RAM OF |
    | THE EDITOR SCREEN ( WHICH STARTS |
    | AT FD00 HEX)                     |
    | ################################ |
    | 10 STORE (ENTER)                 |
    +----------------------------------+

Remember that there is actually a five second leader on most cassette tapes which
cannot be taped over. Therefore, advance the tape at least ten seconds before
storing information.

    STORE       Takes a number off the parameter stack, in this case ten, and
                stores the editor screen with the number as an identifier.

You can only store information from the editor screen. You cannot store
information from the execution screen (also referred to as the console screen).
This should not be a problem, because for most large programs, you will be
working in the editor screen.


4.2  Retrieval

To retrieve information from the tape, the LOAD command is used. As an example,
to retrieve the same screen we just loaded in the last section, the command is:

    10 LOAD    (NEW LINE)

LOAD    This command takes the number on the parameter stack as the screen number
to be loaded from the tape. The routine will continue to look for the screen
until it is found or until it is interrupted by hitting the space key.

After typing 10 LOAD, rewind the tape, then press PLAY and wait for the computer
to read the tape. When the screen is read from the tape, the editor area will
contain the same information that it contained when it was loaded onto the tape.

Typing 0 STORE will ensure that the screen will be the first loaded no matter
what number is specified with LOAD.

Typing 0 LOAD  will load the first screen found on the tape regardless of screen
number. Also, all subsequent screens (after the first screen) can also be loaded
using the --> command described in the next section.

ZX81-FORTH allows any information on the editor screen to be stored and loaded.
The contents of the screen do not have to be FORTH words or definitions. ZX81
BASIC does not allow this. With ZX81-FORTH you have a way to store any
information that you wish (letters, etc.).


4.3  Loading and Compiling Screens

When loading any program from the tape to the editor screen, all of the code on
that screen can be compiled as soon as it is loaded.

CON       The command to turn on the automatic screen compiler.
COFF      The command to turn off the automatic screen compiler.

As an example, create a simple program on the editor screen and store it on tape
as screen 1. Now use the following commands:

    CON 1 LOAD   (NEW LINE)           This will automatically compile the screen
                                      which has been loaded from the tape.

The screen compiler defaults to off on initial power-up, or on a COLD restart.


4.4  Sequential Screen Loading

There may be many times when your FORTH program is longer than one screen. When
this happens each screen must be loaded and compiled before the next screen can
be loaded. It is important that you store your screens in increasing sequential
order if you want to load and compile them in sequence.

To store screens onto the tape in sequential order, you may use the following
command:

<--        This command stores the present editor screen with a screen number
           which is one larger than the last screen stored.

In order to load screens sequentially, the command is:

-->        This symbol, when placed at the bottom of the editor screen and
           compiled, increments the screen count and loads the next screen.

Page    This is an INTEGER variable which contains the most recently accessed
           STOREd or LOADed page number.

BLK        This INTEGER contains the address for the address to which the tape
           will download and from which the tape is loaded. The default value is
           the origin of the display buffer.

Warning: If you are compiling each screen as it is loaded sequentially, you must
give the compiler enough time to compile each screen.

1.  Stop the tape after each screen has been loaded and is compiling. When the
computer is ready to load another screen (horizontal lines appear) restart the
tape.

2.  If large blank spaces are left on the tape when you are saving sequential
screens, there should be enough time to compile each screen before the next one
is to be loaded.

Either of these methods should ensure that the next screen on tape will not be
"played" before the computer is ready to receive it.


5.0  Structure and Command Description

5.1  Stack Structure

FORTH is different from most other computer languages in that it uses a stack. A
stack is a data structure which stores things in the order in which they are
entered. Items can be removed with the last item first. Here is an example:

Configure your screen so that you are on Screen 1, or the execution part of
Screen 2. Enter three numbers:

    0 1 2  (NEW LINE)    The stack looks like this:

    2    top
    1
    0    bottom

To display the top item on the stack, simply type:

    .  (NEW LINE)

This will remove 2 from the stack an display it. Typing:

    .  (NEW LINE)    a second time will display the 1.

All the mathematical operations are also performed on the stack. To examine this,
type the following:

    0 2 3    (NEW LINE)        The stack looks like :

    3
    2
    0

Now type :

    *   (NEW LINE)    This command takes the top two items off of the stack,
                      multiples them, and puts the result back on the stack. The
                      result is :

    6
    0

If another multiplication were performed, then :

    *   (NEW LINE)     Would leave a :

    0                  ( 6 * 0 = 0 )

Most of the commands in ZX81-FORTH use a stack. ZX81-FORTH has a separate 8-bit
character stack and a 16-bit number stack, You will be using the number (or
parameter) stack most of the time. The character stack is discussed in more
detail in the section on character input and output.


5.2  Dictionary and its Use

After reading the last section you should have a feel for how the number stack
works. ZX81-FORTH words are stored in another place in memory, the dictionary.
The dictionary grows upwards from 4000H. Every FORTH word is stored in memory
with a header. The header contains the number of characters in the word plus the
characters of the word itself. The number of characters plus the character
themselves are used by the outer-interpreter when a search of the dictionary is
made for a word.

The programmer can  create new  words in the  dictionary using various compiling
words. These words are described in detail in Section 14.

Here is an example of how a new word would be defined using the COLON and
SEMI-COLON compiling words. (Known as a Colon Definition). To create a word which
takes the average of two numbers on the stack and displays the result, type :

    : AVG  + 2 / . ;  (NEW LINE)    on the execution screen.

or  : AVG  + 2 / . ;  (SHIFT/Q)     on the editor screen.

The above program computes averages by adding the two values on the stack and
then pushing 2 on the stack and performing a divide. The dot (.) then takes the
value off the stack and displays it.

The word AVG can now be used to take the average of two numbers. Find the average
of 86 and 46 by typing :

    86 46 AVG            (NEW LINE)
    66 OK

The answer of 66 is displayed on the screen.

VARIABLEs and INTEGERs (constants) can also be created in the dictionary. This is
covered in Section 10.


5.3  Command Format

Many of the descriptions of the ZX81-FORTH words will be of the following form :

    top --> stack                 stack <-- top
            before    COMMAND     after
          execution             execution

Each word is described by an example. The state of the stack is shown before and
after the word is executed. The words are first described in a generic format and
then an example of each one is given.

What the symbols mean :

    n = 16 bit number (n1, n2, n3, etc.)
    d = 32 bit number (d1, d2, d3 etc.) Sometimes nlow and nhigh are used to
                                        describe how double numbers appear on
                                        the stack or in the dictionary.
    u = unsigned 16 bit number.
 addr = represents an address in memory.
    b = byte.
    c = character.
    f = boolean flag (0=false, 1=true).


6.0  Mathematical Commands

ZX81-FORTH uses integer arithmetic. For some this may be inconvenient at first.
However, one of the commodities a computer has is speed. Often it is desired that
operations be performed as quickly as possible, perhaps because the calculation
is done many times per second, and integer arithmetic is much faster than
floating point arithmetic. If you need more accuracy in your values, the values
can be scaled by a factor of 100 or 1000. Scaling by 100 would allow you to
include pennies in calculations based in the pound and pence system.

Most 16 bit arithmetic is signed arithmetic in ZX81-FORTH. However, most 32 bit,
and all 64 bit arithmetic is unsigned. This may seem to present a problem if you
are not keeping track of the approximate magnitude of your calculations.

Here is the difference between signed and unsigned arithmetic. Below is listed a
chart showing the difference, with the Binary and Hex formats of the numbers
shown. This can be extended to 32 bit and 64 bit numbers.

+-------------+-----------------------+------------+------------+
¦             ¦                       ¦            ¦            ¦
¦  UNSIGNED   ¦        BINARY         ¦    HEX     ¦   SIGNED   ¦
¦             ¦                       ¦            ¦            ¦
+-------------+-----------------------+------------+------------+
¦             ¦                       ¦            ¦            ¦
¦    65535    ¦   1111111111111111    ¦    FFFF    ¦     -1     ¦
¦    65534    ¦   1111111111111110    ¦    FFFE    ¦     -2     ¦
¦     ..      ¦        ..             ¦     ..     ¦     ..     ¦
¦     ..      ¦        ..             ¦     ..     ¦     ..     ¦
¦    32768    ¦   1000000000000000    ¦    8000    ¦   -32768   ¦
¦    32767    ¦   0111111111111111    ¦    7FFF    ¦    32767   ¦
¦     ..      ¦        ..             ¦     ..     ¦     ..     ¦
¦     ..      ¦        ..             ¦     ..     ¦     ..     ¦
¦      0      ¦   0000000000000000    ¦    0000    ¦      0     ¦
¦             ¦                       ¦            ¦            ¦
+-------------+-----------------------+------------+------------+

                             Table 6.1
             Unsigned, Signed, Binary, and Hex Numbers

+    (Addition)    Adds the top two stack items n1 and n2 leaving the sum on the
                   stack.

n1 + n                           1 1 + . (NEW LINE)
n2                               2 OK

-    (Subtraction)  Subtracts the top item, n1 from the second item, n2 and
                    leaves the result on the stack.

n1 - n                           2 1 - . (NEW LINE)
n2                               1 OK

*    (Multiplication)  Multiplies the top two items, n1 and n2, and leaves the
                       product on top of the stack

n1 * n                           2 4 * . (NEW LINE)
n2                               8 OK

/    (Division)    Divides the second item, n2 by the top item, n1, and leaves
                   the result on top.

n1 / n                           6 2 / . (NEW LINE)
n2                               3 OK

2*   (Multiply by 2)   This multiplies the top stack item by two.

n1 2* n                          3 2* . (NEW LINE)
                                 6 OK

2/   (Divide by 2)    This divides the top stack item by two.

n1 2/ n                          4 2/ . (NEW LINE)
                                 2 OK

ABS  (Absolute Value)    Leaves the absolute value of the top item on top of the
                         stack.

n1 ABS n                         -12 ABS . (NEW LINE)
                                 12 OK

MAX   (Maximum)     Finds the larger of the two top stack items and leaves it on
                    top of the stack.

n1 MAX n                         9 4 MAX . (NEW LINE)
n2                               9 OK

MIN  (Minimum)    Finds the smaller of the two top stack items and leaves it on
                  top of the stack.

n1 MIN n                         9 4 MIN . (NEW LINE)
n2                               4 OK

MINUS  (Unary minus)  Changes the sign of the top stack item.

n1 MINUS n                       31 MINUS . (NEW LINE)
                                 -31 OK

+-    (Swap Sign)    Applies the sign of the top item, n1, to the second item,
                     n2 and leaves the second item at the top of the stack.

n1 +- n2 (signed)                2 -3 +- . (NEW LINE)
n2                               -2 OK

MOD                   Performs the division, n2/n1, and leaves the 16 bit
                      reminder on the stack.

n1 MOD nr                        15 4 MOD . (NEW LINE)
n2                               3 OK

/MOD                 Performs the division, n2/n1, and leaves the reminder n1 on
                     top, and the quotient, n2, as the second item.

n1 /MOD n1                       5 2 /MOD . (NEW LINE)
n2      n2                       1 OK     . (NEW LINE)
                                 2 OK

*/MOD              Multiplies the second, n2, and third, n3, items and divides by
                   the first, n1, leaving the remainder on the top of the stack
                   with the quotient below it. (Signed arithmetic).

n1 */MOD nr                      3 3 2 */MOD . (NEW LINE)
n2       nq                      1 OK     . (NEW LINE)
n3                               4 OK

M*                This multiplies two 16 bit numbers, n1 and n2, and leaves a 32
                  bit result, d.

n1 *M d                          20000 20000 M* D. (NEW LINE)
n2                               400000000 OK

M/                This divides a 32 bit number, d, by a 16 bit number, n, leaving
                  a 16 bit remainder, nr on top of the stack and a 16 bit
                  quotient, nq, as the second item.

n M/ nr                          400000001 20000 M/ . (NEW LINE)
d    nq                          1 OK               . (NEW LINE)
                                 20000 OK

MD*                  This multiplies two 32 bit numbers on the stack leaving a 64
                     bit result.

d1 MD* dlow
d2    dhigh

MD/                This divides a 64 bit number by a 32 bit number, d1, leaving a
                   32 bit remainder, dr, and a 32 bit result, dq.

d1   MD/ dr
dlow     dq
dhigh

D*                 This multiplies two signed 32 bit integer numbers together and
                   leaves a 32 bit signed result on the stack.

d1 D* d                          -30000 25000 D* D. (NEW LINE)
d2                               -750000000 OK

D/                  This takes a 32 bit unsigned number and divides it by a 32
                    bit unsigned number generating a 32 bit remainder and a 32
                    bit quotient.

=*/             Multiplies the second item, n2, and the third item, n3, and then
                divides by the first, n1, leaving the result on the stack.

n1   */ n                        4 6 3 */ . (NEW LINWE)
n2                               8 OK
n3

D+    (32 bit add)  This is a double precision add which adds the top 32 bit
                    numbers found on the stack.

d1 D+ d1                         4 6 3 */ . (NEW LINE)
d2                               8 OK

D-    (32 bit subtract) Performs a double precision subtraction of the top 32 bit
                        item from the second 32 bit item.

d1 D- d1                         4 6 3 */ . (NEW LINE)
d2                               8 OK

DABS   (32 bit ABS)  This operation takes the absolute value of the 32 bit number
                     on the stack.

d1 DABS d2

DMINUS  (32 bit MINUS)  Changes the sign on a 32 bit number.

d1 DMINUS d2                     40000 DMINUS D. (NEW LINE)

-40000 OK

U*    (Unsigned *)   This multiplies the two unsigned numbers found on the stack,
                     leaving an unsigned result.

u1 U* u                          6000 6 U* U. (NEW LINE)
u2                               36000 OK

UMOD    (Unsigned MOD)  The second unsigned 32 bit item, ud2, is divided by the
                        top number, u1, leaving the unsigned remainder.

u1 UMOD u
ud2

U/MOD   (Unsigned /MOD) The second unsigned 32 bit item, ud2, is divided by the
                        top number, u1, leaving the remainder on the top of the
                        stack and the quotient as the second item.

u1  U/MOD ur
ud2       uq


7.0  Logical operators & Comparison

7.1  Logical Operators

AND          Performs a bitwise AND of the two 16 bit items on the stack.

             13 00001101       (8 bit example)
              7 00000111
             AND
              5 00000101       result

OR           Performs a bitwise OR of the two 16 bit items on the stack.

              5 00000101       (8 bit example)
              9 00001001
              OR
             13  00001101      result  (13=0D hex)

XOR          Performs a bitwise exclusive-or, XOR, of the two 16 bit items on the
             stack.

              5 00000101       (8 bit example)
              7 00000111
             XOR
              2 00000010       result


7.2  Comparison Operators

<            If the second stack item is less than the first, the operation
             leaves a 1, otherwise will leave a 0.

u1 < f                           0 2 < . (NEW LINE)
u2                               1 OK      true

>            If the second stack item is greater than the first, the operation
             leaves a 1, otherwise will leave a 0.

u1 > f                           0 2 > . (NEW LINE)
u2                               0 OK      false

0=           Tests whether the top item is 0. If it is, then the operation leaves
             a 1, otherwise it will leave a 0.

u1 0= f                          13 0= . (NEW LINE)
                                 0 OK      false

0>           Tests whether the top item is positive. If it is, then the operation
             leaves a 1, otherwise it leaves a 0.

u1 0> f

0<           Tests whether the top item is negative. If it is, then the operation
             leaves a 1, otherwise it leaves a 0.

u1 0< f

=            Tests whether the top two item are equal. If they are, then the
             operation leaves a 1, otherwise it leaves a 0.

u1 = f                           37 DUP = . (NEW LINE)
u2                               1 OK         true

C=           Just like = but it only checks the least significant byte of the
             two stack items.

c1 C= f                          259 3 C= . (NEW LINE)
c2                               1 OK           true (259 mod 256 = 3)

D<           Checks if the second 32 bit item is larger than the first 32 bit
             item. If the operation is true, then a 1 is left, otherwise a 0 is
             left. This is an unsigned comparison.

d1 D< f
d2

D>           Checks if the second 32 bit item is smaller than the first 32 bit
             item. If the operation is true, then a 1 is left, otherwise a 0 is
             left. This is an unsigned comparison.

d1 D> f
d2

D=           Checks if the 32 bit items on the stack are equal. If they are, a 1
             is left, otherwise a 0 is left.

d1 D= f
d2

DMAX         Leaves the larger of the two 32 bit items on the stack. This is an
             unsigned operator, so -2 will be greater than 2.

d1 DMAX d
d2

DMIN         Leaves the smaller of the two 32 bit items on the stack. This is an
             unsigned operator.

d1 DMIN d
d2

D0=          Checks whether the 32 bit item on the stack is equal to zero. If it
             is, a 1 is left, otherwise a 0 is left.

d1 D0= f

U<           This is an unsigned less then comparison of the two 16 bit items on
             the stack. If u2 is less than u1, then a 1 is left, otherwise a 0 is
             left.

u1 U< f
u2


8.0  Number Bases & Stack Manipulation

8.1  Number Bases

FORTH is capable of working in any number base. This is not so difficult to
achieve, however, as the microprocessor can only work in Binary. This means that
a conversion process must be done to work in Decimal or Hex. Once you have that
conversion process, it is not difficult to extend it over all number bases.
FORTH refers to a variable called BASE during numerical conversion, and changing
base is as simple as changing the contents of the variable BASE.

The default base on initial power-up is Decimal. (Base 10, 0 to 9)

DECIMAL       Sets the current base to decimal.

HEX           Sets the current base to hexadecimal. (Base 16)

BASE          An INTEGER variable used to contain the current base of the system.

    n1 TO BASE (NEW LINE) Makes the current base n1.

    BASE . (NEW LINE)   Places the current base on to the stack.
    n1 OK

    3 TO BASE (NEW LINE)  Changes the base to 3.
    DECIMAL 532 3 TO BASE . (NEW LINE)
    201201 OK            (201201 is 532 in base 3)

After DECIMAL and HEX, the most useful number base is BINARY and a definition of
BINARY would be :

    : BINARY 2 TO BASE ;


8.2  Stack Manipulation

.           A dot "." prints the top 16 bit item on the output device (video
            screen).

                     1 2 3 . (NEW LINE)
                     3 OK     prints the top item

D.          (Double number display)   A double number (32 bit item) is taken off
            of the top of the stack and displayed on screen.

U.          (Unsigned number display)   An unsigned number is taken off of the
            top of the stack and displayed on screen. An unsigned 16 bit number
            ranges from 0-65535 whereas a signed 16 bit number ranges from
            -32768 to +32767.

S->D        This is a 16 to 32 bit sign extension word

n1 S->D d1                           45 S->D D. (NEW LINE)
                                     45 OK

D->Q        This is a 32 to 64 bit sign extension word

DROP        Drops the top stack item.

n1 DROP n2                           45 S->D D. (NEW LINE)
n2                                   45 OK

2DROP       Drops the top two stack items, or a double number.

DUP         Copies the top stack item.

n1 DUP n1
       n1

?DUP        Duplicates the top item only if it is non-zero.

OVER        Copies the second stack item to the top.

n1 OVER n2
n2      n1
        n2

PICK        Copies the stack item indexed by the top stack item, and places it on
            top of the stack.

n1 PICK n3
n2      n1
n3      n2
        n3     (a 2 PICK is the same as an OVER)

SWAP          This word interchanges the top two stack items.

n1 SWAP n2
n2      n1

DSWAP         This word interchanges the top two 32 bit stack items.

d1 SWAP d2
d2      d1

ROT           This word rotates the top three stack items. Item 3 goes to the
              top, and the remaining two items are pushed down the stack.

n1 ROT n3
n2     n1
n3     n2


9.0  Memory Commands & Memory Manipulation

FC56H is an address containing the present memory size connected to the ZX81. To
display the memory size type the following :

               HEX FC56 @ DECIMAL . (NEW LINE)
               16384 OK      (This is the memory size of a system with a 16k
                             RAM-Pack)

MEM            This word places the amount of memory currently available to the
               system onto the stack.

               DECIMAL MEM . (NEW LINE)
               14976 OK   (This is the memory available to a 16k system at power-
                          up)

VLIST          This will display all FORTH words currently found in memory.

SP@            This will put on to the stack the current address of the stack
               pointer.

ALLOT          This word takes a number from the stack and reserves that many
               bytes in the dictionary.

               0 VARIABLE V1 22 ALLOT  (NEW LINE)

               OK      (When executed, V1 will now place the low address on the
               stack, of a 24 byte block of RAM in the dictionary which could be
               used for arrays or character strings, etc. 22 bytes were reserved
               by ALLOT and 2 were reserved by VARIABLE to give 24 in total.)

@              (SHIFT/E)         This fetches the value at the memory location
                addressed by the top stack item, and places it on the stack.

addr @ n1                  A practical example might be :
                    30 +ORG @            (30 +ORG references the address of the
                system variable that stores the start address of the display
                buffer, which is usually FD00H)

!               (SHIFT/W)      This word stores the second stack item in the
                memory address specified by the top stack item.

n1 !                         HEX 32 FD00 ! (NEW LINE)
addr                         OK

                This puts an "R" in the upper left hand corner of the video
                display in a 32k or less system.

ZX-FORTH does not guard against you storing values in dangerous areas, such as
the system variables, so be careful to store only in free memory.

?               Fetches and displays the content of the address on top of the
                stack.

                V1 ?  (NEW LINE)    (If V1 is a variable, ? will print its
                contents.)

+!              Increments the contents of the memory location addressed by the
                top stack item, by the second stack item.

addr +!                      25 V1 +!  (This will add 25 to V1)
n

C!              Stores a one byte item into the location addressed by the second
                item on the stack.

C@              Fetches a one byte item from the location addressed by the stack
                item and places it onto the stack.

                addr C@ b

COPY            This copies one screen of information (512 Bytes) to the address
                on top of the stack from the address found as the second item on
                the stack.

addr1 COPY
addr2
                    0 VARIABLE SCR1 510 ALLOT (NEW LINE)
                    FBUF SCR1 COPY     (NEW LINE)

                This will store the contents of the editor screen into a memory
                buffer called SCR1. To recall that information all you have to do
                is type SCR1 FBUF COPY (NEW LINE)

MOVE            This word is used to move blocks of memory around the system. It
                will take 3 items from the stack. The first is the number of
                words (2 bytes) you want to move, the second is the destination
                address, and the third is the source address. A routine which
                will do the same thing as the example for COPY above is :

                FBUF  CR1 256 MOVE (NEW LINE)    This takes the contents of the
                editor screen and moves it to SCR1. 256 words is 512 bytes.

FILL            This word is used to fill areas of memory with a specified byte.
                The FILL word takes three items from the stack. The first is
                the byte which is to fill the memory, the second the number of
                bytes to be filled, and the third is the starting address of the
                area to be filled.

                FBUF 512 14 FILL (NEW LINE)       Will fill the edit screen with
                dots. (Using Sinclair's non-ASCII character codes.)

BLANKS          This word is just like FILL but it fills memory with 0's and only
                uses two items from the stack.

                FBUF 512 BLANKS      Will blank out the editor screen. (Using
                Sinclair's non-ASCII character codes.)

FBUF            This is an INTEGER value which contains the base address of the
                display buffer. To access the display buffer all one needs is to
                is type FBUF and the address of the display buffer will be placed
                on the stack. To change FBUF all you need to do is put the new
                buffer address onto the stack and type TO FBUF.

+ORG            Adds the item found on the stack to the address of the beginning
                of the system variables and is most commonly used to access the
                system variables.

D!              Stores a 32 bit number at the address found at the top of the
                stack.

addr D!
nlow
nhigh

D@              Fetches the 32 bit number found in the location addressed by the
                item on top of the stack.

addr D@ nhigh
        nlow

PAD             Execution of this word places the address of a 64 byte scratch-
                pad on to the stack. This pad may be used for temporary storage
                by the user. The PAD will overlay other parts of ZX81-FORTH if
                the 64 byte limit is exceeded, so be careful!


10.0 Data Types and Variables

10.1  Data Types

ZX81-FORTH as you probably realise by now operates on either 16 bit or 32 bit
integers. There are operators for both types of numbers. Integers are one type of
data, while another type is character data. ZX81-FORTH characters are standard
ASCII characters and can be found in Section 12.5. On some systems floating-point
numbers are included. For space reasons, ZX81- FORTH does not include floating-
point arithmetic, but an extension ROM will be available.


10.2  Variables

VARIABLE is used to create a variable which references a memory location used to
store two bytes of information, usually a value. Whenever the variable so
created is executed, the address of that variable is placed on the stack. An
initial value is always assigned to the variable when it is created, and this
value can be changed at will.

    value VARIABLE varname

        value = the initial content of the variable.
        varname = is a name chosen by the programmer.

    0 VARIABLE AVG     (NEW LINE)
    OK    (0 is the initial value and AVG is the name)
    AVG @ . (NEW LINE)
    0 OK  (AVG places the address of AVG on the stack, @ gets the contents and
    . prints it to the screen)

The user can also create 32 bit variables using the word 2VAR. This creates a 4
byte variable, and behaves the same way as the other variable.


10.3  Integers

INTEGER       This word is very much like variable. It creates a 2 byte variable
in the dictionary, but instead of placing the address of the variable on the
stack, it laces the actual value."

    value INTEGER intname

    100 INTEGER INT1     (NEW LINE)
    OK        (Here we have created an integer variable with the initial value of
              100)

In ZX81-FORTH, the word INTEGER behaves identically to the word CONSTANT in other
FORTH'S.  It has been  used  to keep  variables because of the space saving such
a method allows.

TO     Allows the user to change an INTEGER value.

    3 TO BASE   changes BASE's contents to 3


10.4  Arrays

Arrays can be created in FORTH just as they can in BASIC, FORTRAN, or any other
languages. First, space must be allocated in the dictionary."

    0 VARIABLE VAL   22 ALLOT   (NEW LINE)         This will create a variable
    called VAL. It then gives VAL an initial value of 0 and reserves 22
    additional bytes for it in the dictionary. This gives VAL the capacity to
    hold 12 16 bit numbers (24 bytes).

To access any  byte value in the array put the array item you wish to access on
the stack and use the following commands.

    2*  VAL   @    (NEW LINE)       This will access the proper array value by
    doubling the index, adding it to the address, and fetching the proper number
    from that address."

This is not the only way to construct arrays. A more efficient and elegant way is
to use the <BUILDS ... DOES> construct. This method will be shown in Section
14.2. As data structures, arrays are of fundamental importance in implementing
solutions to programming problems."


11.0  Control Structures

Unlike other FORTH versions, ZX81-FORTH allows the user to use the IF .. ELSE ..
THEN and the ... DO ... LOOP and the other statements outside of a colon
definition. It does this by creating a headerless word which executes
immediately.

    IF .. ELSE .. THEN     This is a special structure used to create logical
branches. IF checks the top entry on the stack. If the top stack entry is
non-zero, (true) the code between the IF and ELSE is executed. If the top entry
is zero, (false) the code between the ELSE and the THEN is executed. For
example :

    1 IF ." TRUE " ELSE ." FALSE " THEN  (NEW LINE)
    TRUE OK  (The words between IF and ELSE is executed.)

    0 IF ." TRUE " ELSE ." FALSE " THEN  (NEW LINE)
    FALSE OK  (The words between ELSE and THEN is executed.)

    IF  .. THEN    This is a simpler construct then the IF .. ELSE .. THEN
construct. This statement allows the execution of code if the value on the stack
is non-zero (true). Another example :

    1 IF 1 1 + . THEN (NEW LINE)
    2 OK          This displays the addition of 1 and 1, because the test is
true, having found a non-zero value on the stack before the IF. If the initial
value were zero the code would not be executed.

DO .. LOOP         The DO LOOP uses the top two indices on the stack followed by
executable code within the DO and LOOP words.

    limit initial DO .. code .. LOOP

    limit = the upper limit of the loop count.
    initial = the lower limit of the loop count.

The index is incremented by one from the initial value to one less than the
limit. The value of the index is accessible via the word I.

        For example :

9 0 DO I . LOOP  (NEW LINE)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 OK           should be displayed. Note that the upper limit 9
                               does not get executed.

DO   ...  +LOOP               This construct allows the user to increment or
decrement the count by any value and looks  like this :

    limit initial DO .. code increment +LOOP
    limit = is the upper or lower limit for the loop count.
    initial = the value where the count is started.
    code = any FORTH word or words.
    increment = any positive or negative value.

    -5 0 DI I . -1 +LOOP   (NEW LINE)
    0 -1 -2 -3 -4 OK

LEAVE              This terminates the lop at the next LOOP or +LOOP. It could be
used in an IF THEN clause.

For nested loops a second index is available, the index J. For further nested
loops, the NI index can be used.

    0 NI corresponds to I
    1 NI corresponds to J
    2 NI would correspond to the next index and so on.

CASE         is most often used in a definition, however it can also be used
interactively on the execution screen. The command format is as follows :

    CASE e0 e1 e2 e3 e4 ;  (2 or more statements may be used)

    STACK VALUE         EXECUTION PRIORITY
         0                    e0
         1                    e1
         2                    e2
         3                    e3
         etc.                 etc.

The statement at e0 is executed when the stack value before the CASE has a value
of 0, e1 hen the stack value is 1, etc. e1 may be a FORTH definition, or any
mathematical expression. To test a CASE type :

    2 3 (NEW LINE)
    OK
    1 CASE * + ; . (NEW LINE)     (this will execute the +)
    5 OK

BEGIN .. code .. AGAIN           This statement will execute any code found
between the BEGIN and AGAIN words. When AGAIN is reached control is transferred
to BEGIN and the code is executed again thus creating an infinite loop.

    BEGIN ." HELLO " CR AGAIN            (NEW LINE)       and will print out
    HELLO
    HELLO
    HELLO
    HELLO
    ..
    ..

Hello's will continue to be printed to the bottom of the screen, and then print
will continue by scrolling.

On most machines that will be the end of the matter, as the only way to restart
FORTH would be to switch off the machine and reload, but ZX81-FORTH a SHIFT/SPACE
(break) will return you to the normal keyboard. This because the keyboard is a
system task!!"

    BEGIN .. ode.. flag UNTIL

    code = any FORTH word or words.
    flag = a logical operation which leaves a true or false value on the stack
           which is tested by UNTIL. If the flag is true, (non-zero) the loop is
           terminated, otherwise the execution flow returns to BEGIN and carries
           on through the loop again. For example :

    0 BEGIN 1 + DUP DUP . 9 = UNTIL  (NEW LINE)
    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 OK

This routine takes the top stack value, (initially a 0) increments it by one,
duplicates it twice in order to save the value before displaying it, and then it
performs the logical operation, a comparison to 9. In this case, the 9 is printed
out. This is because the FORTH statements are executed before the UNTIL checks
the top value of the stack against 9.

    BEGIN .. WHILE .. REPEAT        The construct of this word is as follows :

    BEGIN .. words .. test WHILE .. words REPEAT

    words = can be any FORTH word or words.
    test =  is a logical operator which leaves a true or false value for WHILE to
            test.

For example :
    BEGIN 1 + DUP DUP . 5 > WHILE ." END " REPEAT  (NEW LINE)
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 END OK


12.0 Character Input/Output

12.1  Character Stack

ZX81-FORTH is unique in that it has both number and character stacks.

The character stack store bytes of ASCII code and provides a more efficient and
convenient method for storage and manipulation then a parameter stack on its own.
The stack pointer for the character stack can be found in the system variable
located at address FC84 hex. ZX81-FORTH uses the IY register of the CPU to hold
the parameter stack pointer. These stacks are independent of each other, but in
order to make use of the character handling routines of a system, character
strings must maintain a certain format. A character string consists of two
parts : the string of ASCII characters that reside on the character stack which
actually makes up the string, and a number which sits on the parameter stack and
is a count of how many characters that are stored in the character string on the
character stack. Manipulating character strings is done through manipulation of
the numbers on the parameter stack which represent the length of the character
strings. For instance, to concatenate two character strings into a single
character string, all one needs to do is add the two numbers on the parameter
stack together to generate a number which represents one composite character
string. Or simply put, a + concatenates strings.


12.2  Character Commands

String I/O

."         Defines the beginning of a string of characters to be output to the
           screen. Any character found between a ." and a " will be placed into a
           character string and output to the console device (the execution
           screen). For instance :"

           : MESS ." THIS IS A MESSAGE " ;  Will print THIS IS A MESSAGE to the
           console each time MESS is encountered in a program or typed on the
           execution screen.

"          This works just like ." except instead of taking the character string
           and outputting it to the console device, the " will leave the character
           string on the character stack to be manipulated either by another
           routine or directed to another screen. The length of the string will
           be found on the parameter stack immediately after the " is executed.
           The parser expects a space immediately after the first " and does not
           count it as a character. Both the ." and " use the " as delimiter to
           mark the end of the input character string. Example :

           ." THIS IS A STRING "  When placed in a definition or in the execution
           screen will display the string between the quotes.

           " THIS IS A STRING "   This will insert the string in the character
           buffer with the number of characters in the string placed on the
           parameter stack.

ABORT"     Checks a flag taken from the parameter stack and if the flag is true
           (non-zero) then a user defined error message is placed between the
           final " in ABORT" and a warm restart is executed. This command could
           be useful for displaying user defined error text in a program.

           Example :

           1 ABORT" ERROR 10 " (NEW LINE)
           ERROR 10 OK

           0 ABORT" ERROR 10 " (NEW LINE)
           OK

CR         Is used to print a carriage return, line feed on the console screen.

SP         Will print a space on the console screen.

CLS        Will clear the console screen.

EMIT       This word is used to take an ASCII character from the parameter stack
           and output it to the console screen.

KEY        Calls a routine which will get a value from the keyboard and put the
           ASCII value of that key onto the parameter stack.

S@         This word gets a word from the keyboard (ending with a pace or CR) and
           puts that token or string onto the character stack.

W!         This will take a character string and store it onto the address found
           above the character count of the string on the parameter stack.

           " I WILL PUT THIS IN THE PAD " PAD W!    will put the text into PAD.
           After the string is transferred to PAD, what the memory image looks
           like is a single byte character count followed by the character
           string. In other words, after executing the string above, typing a
           PAD C@ . will print out the number of characters in that string
           (27 in this case).

W@         Will take an address from the parameter stack and fetch the character
           string stored at that address. It places the character string itself
           on to the character stack and the number of characters in the
           character string onto the parameter stack.

           PAD W@ CO .W  (NEW LINE)    will print the character string found in
           PAD out to the screen console.

.W         Allows output of a string to the console screen, editor screen, or any
           other user defined screen. The command expects to find the string on
           the character stack with the number of characters on the parameter
           stack and must be preceded by a valid screen identifier.

           On the execution screen enter the following :

           " THIS IS A STRING " (NEW LINE)"

           To display this to the console screen (the execution screen) type :

           CO .W    (NEW LINE)

           To display this to the editor screen, type :

           ED  .W    (NEW LINE)          and to display to any other user defined
           screen type:

           screen-identifier .W     (NEW LINE)

.C         This word follows the same format as .W but it works like EMIT. It
           uses two numbers from the parameter stack, the first is the screen
           identifier, the second is the ASCII value of the character that you
           want to output on the identified screen.

.CN        This word is just like .W except that it always directs output to the
           console screen and so it needs no screen identifier. .CN will then
           take a character string and output it to the console. A ." TEXT " is
           just like a " TEXT " .CN

CDROP      This word drops a character string off of the character stack. It
           assumes that a character count is on the parameter stack as usual.

CDUP       Is used to take a character string from the character stack and direct
           it to the keyboard input buffer just as though that character string
           had been typed in on the keyboard. This is used for a variety of
           things; one of which comes to mind is the dynamic self re-scheduling
           of tasks. A simple example of how .CO works is :

           " VLIST " .CO (NEW LINE)
           OK

           VLIST    etc.    OK    will take the character string VLIST and
           direct it to the keyboard just if you had typed it.

.CO        This word will duplicate a character string on the character stack
           much the same as DUP does to the parameter stack.


12.3  Character/Number Stack

There are a group of words in ZX81-FORTH which use both the number/parameter
stack and the character stack. These word types are described in this section.
Remember that a character string always consists of two things; a number on the
parameter stack which describes the length of the character string, and the
character string itself which resides on the character stack.

C>N        This word removes one character from the character stack and places
           that character's ASCII value onto the parameter stack. It will
           reduce the character count which is on the parameter stack by one and
           place the ASCII value of the character taken from the character stack
           on top of the character count. If the character string is empty this
           routine will leave the null character count at zero and return a 0
           ASCII value.

N>C        This does just the opposite of C>N. It takes an ASCII character value
           off of the parameter stack and places it onto the character stack. The
           character count for the character string that the ASCII character will
           be append to, should be under the ASCII value on the parameter stack.
           The character count will be incremented by one to reflect the extra
           character on the character stack.

W>         This word is used to format character strings for output. If you have
           a character string that is only 5 characters long and you want it to
           fill up eight spaces when it is printed, you could do this simply by
           the command 8 W>. This will take any character string of seven
           characters or less and append enough spaces to the beginning of it to
           make it eight characters long. VLIST uses this to get all the words
           into columns. A definition which will convert a number on the
           parameter stack to a formatted three character long character string
           and print it out could look something like this:

           : .F # 3 W> CO .W ;

           If you use .F instead of . all your numbers will be printed out in at
           least 3 character long strings.

           : TBL  CLS 11 1 DO 11 1 DO I J * .F LOOP CR LOOP ;

           TBL is a definition which will generate a 10 by 10 multiplication
           table.

H>A        Is useful when transforming HEX nibbles into ASCII equivalent
           characters. H>A takes a number off the parameter stack in the range
           0-15 decimal and converts it into its appropriate ASCII equivalent and
           leaves the character on the parameter stack. A 13 H>A EMIT will echo a
           D on the execution screen.

A>H        Does just the opposite of H>A, it removes an ASCII value in the range
           0-9, A-F and leaves on the parameter stack its HEX equivalent.

>#         This is a word that is used to attempt to convert characters in a
           character string to a number on the parameter stack. Let's say that
           the character string which represents 100 is found on the character
           stack, by executing a ># the character string will be converted to a
           16 bit integer with a value of 100 and it will be placed onto the
           parameter stack. This word leaves a flag of 1 on the parameter stack
           above the converted number if the conversion is successful, otherwise
           the flag will be 0. If the conversion is unsuccessful the character
           the character string will be left unchanged and can be used to prompt
           the user for a correct character string. A definition which would use
           the full capabilities of this word follows :

           : READ BEGIN ." ? " S@ ># WHILE"

           CR CO .W ." IS NOT GOOD TRY AGAIN " REPEAT ;

           This word will prompt the user for input with a ? and leave the input
           number on the stack if the conversion is good, otherwise it will print
           out the original string and ask for further input until a good string
           is input.

#          Does the opposite of >#, it removes a character from the parameter
           stack and converts it into a character string in the current base.
           The dot "." word uses # and is defined as : . # CO .W ;

U#         Is just like # but performs unsigned conversion from a 16 bit number
           to a character string.  U. is defined as
           : U. U# CO .W ;
D#         Is the double number version of #. D. is then defined as
           : D. D# CO .W ;


12.4  Character Comparison

W=         Expects  two  numbers  from the  parameter stack, both should be
           addresses of character strings which are to be compared character by
           character for equality. If the two strings which are pointed to are
           equal, a 1 will be placed on the parameter stack; if the two are not 
           equal, a 0 will be placed on the stack. Both of the addresses will be
           removed before the flag is left.

S=         Takes an address off of the parameter stack which points to a string
           which is to be compared to the character string on the character
           stack. This is much the same as W= except that here one of the
           character strings is on the character stack already. This routine
           removes the address but leaves the character string on the stack
           intact before it leaves the flag.


12.5 Keyboard Allocations

Key       Shifted Key  Shifted Key Function

1         EDIT         Toggles between screens
2         AND          Fetches a line from PAD
3         THEN         Puts a line into PAD
4         TO           Deletes a line from the editor screen
5         ?            Moves cursor left
6         ?            Moves cursor down
7         ?            Moves cursor up
8         ?            Moves cursor right
9         GRAPHICS     Inserts a line on the editor screen
0         RUBOUT       Deletes one character
Q         ""           Compiles an editor screen
W         OR           Store word. Displayed as !
E         STEP         Fetch a word. Displayed as @
R         <=           [ character
T         <>           _ character
Y         >=           ] character
U         $            $ character
I         (            ( character
O         )            ) character
P         "            " character
A         STOP         Clears the present screen
S         LPRINT       % character
D         SLOW         ' character
F         FAST         \ character
G         LLIST        ^ character
H         **           # character
J         -            - character
K         +            + character
L         =            = character
NEW LINE  FUNCTION     Home cursor to top left corner
Z         :            : character
X         ;            ; character
C         ?            ? character
V         /            / character
B         *            * character
N         <            < character
M         >            > character
.         ,            , character
SPACE     BREAK        WARM Restart, if held for 1/2 second COLD restart.


13.0  The Printer

P          Toggles the printer on or off. If the printer routine is on, any
           information that goes to the video display will also go to the
           printer. As an example, to get a listing of all the FORTH words
           presently in the dictionary, type :

           P   VLIST    (NEW  LINE)      This prints to both the printer and the
           console.

PRTR       PRTR is to the printer device as EMIT is to the console device. By
           putting an ASCII value onto the parameter stack you can output that
           character to the printer by using PRTR. This works regardless of
           whether the P toggle is on or off.

.P         This word is written for the ZX-Printer or any other compatible
           printer which is made explicitly for the ZX81. What it does is look
           for a character string in PAD which is 32 characters long or less, and
           print that line out on the ZX-Printer. The word will pad the rest of
           an empty line out with spaces and print one complete line out to the
           printer. It will not do anything with a user defined printer routine.

           " THIS IS A TEST " PAD W! .P  (NEW LINE)   will print

           THIS IS A TEST  out to your ZX-Printer.

PRINT      Is used when you have some other ASCII compatible device that you want
           your printer output to be directed to rather than the ZX-Printer. The
           routine which you write to interface into must remove the ASCII value
           from off the parameter stack and use it to output to your printer
           device. As an example, let us say we have an RS-232 card attached to
           our system and we have written two routines to interface to that card.
           One of them is a routine which will return only if the RS-232 card is
           ready to accept another character for output; let us call this
           routine RS_READY. The other routine is simply the routine which will
           place the address of the RS-232 output port onto the stack, we will
           call this one RS_ADDRESS. Now we can use these in the following manner
           to output characters through the RS-232 port instead of the defaulted
           ZX-Printer.

           : RS_OUT  RS_READY RS_ADDRESS C@ ;  This will output one character
           taken from off of the parameter stack to the RS-232 port.

           PRINT RS_OUT   This reassigns the printer output to the routine RS_OUT
           instead of the default routine.


14.0 Defining Words

14.1  Colon / Semicolon

FORTH is different from many other languages in that it allows the user to define
his or her own words to extend the language. The user can completely customise a
set of words which can then be used in any program.

The basic construct of a colon definition is

    : wordname program ;

In ZX81-FORTH 'wordname' is compiled into the dictionary as a word with a
specific operation as defined after wordname and before semi-colon. Try ...

    : AVG + 2 / ; (NEW LINE)
    OK

Successfully typing the above word will define a word which adds the top two
stack items and divides by two. In other words, AVG finds the average of two
numbers. To execute this word, type:

    2 4 AVG .  (NEW LINE)
    3 OK

The above statement will put 2 on the stack, then put 4 on the stack, then
execute the commands as defined by AVG, and finally display the top stack item
left by AVG. We will now define a word that takes the average of two sets of
numbers by using AVG and then check to see if the averages are equal. It will
also print an appropriate response.

    : EQUAL  AVG ROT ROT AVG = IF
    ." EQUAL " ELSE ." NOT EQUAL"
    THEN;

    24 24 12 6 EQUAL   (NEW LINE)
    NOT EQUAL OK

The two ROT commands here are included to put the value calculated by AVG on the
bottom of the stack and the next two numbers to be averaged on the top.

FORGET     You can forget any word in the dictionary with FORGET providing it is
           not protected by the FENCE value. Simply type :

           FORGET word   (NEW LINE)

           and the word along with any dictionary entries compiled after 'word'
           will be removed from the dictionary.

FENCE      You can protect any word from FORGET by typing :

               FENCE word     (NEW LINE)


14.2  : word .. <BUILDS ... DOES> .. ;

This is one of the most important and powerful FORTH structures. With it you can
define new defining words. What this means is that you can create new types of
defining words, and using these words new types of data structures can be
produced and great power can be given to the programmer. The format for this word
is :

: new-defining-word <BUILDS definition code DOES> run-time code ;

    defining-word = the name of the new defining word.
    definition code  = the code which is executed when the defining-word is used
          to create a new word.
    run-time code = this code is executed when the new word is used as a command
          word.

It is possible in a  <BUILDS  DOES>  construct to have no definition code or
run-time code. As an example:

    : ARRAY <BUILDS 20 ALLOT DOES> ;     Here is an example of the construct with
    no run-time code. This statement will allow the user to create arrays of ten
    words (20 ALLOT sets aside 20 bytes in the dictionary, enough for ten 16-bit
    variables). ARRAY is now a compiling word which is a lot like VARIABLE except
    that it reserves 20 bytes in the dictionary for user variables instead of
    just two and also uses no initialiser. An example of how to use ARRAY
    follows:

     ARRAY NUMBER  (NEW LINE)

    This creates an array called NUMBER which will reserve twenty bytes for
    number storage in the dictionary. To access these twenty bytes we need some
    way to reference them, perhaps by placing the address of where they are found
    in memory onto the stack. It just so happens that this is exactly what
    executing NUMBER will do for us. NUMBER places the address of the first byte
    of the twenty bytes ALLOTed to NUMBER onto the stack.

The program can be expanded as shown below. We will create a one dimension array
and will allow the user to access any number in the array by placing an index on
the stack.

    : ARRAY1 <BUILDS 40 ALLOT DOES> SWAP 2* + ;

    ARRAY1 is now a defining word which when used will create a twenty word
    array. Let's make one called XYZ

    ARRAY1 XYZ    (NEW LINE)

    We have now created in the dictionary an array called XYZ. We can insert a
    number, say 123, into the 11th word in this array by typing:

    123 11 XYZ !  (NEW LINE)

What has happened up to this point ?  First, a 123 was placed onto the stack.
Second, the index 11 was placed on the stack, and third, XYZ is encountered. XYZ
first places the address of memory in the dictionary where the array is located
and then initiates the execution of the code following DOES>. In this case the
top two stack items are swapped (putting the index on the top and the address
below it). Next, we double the index with 2* because we are dealing with 16-bit
values and address memory in 8-bit bytes. The next thing we do is add the offset
of the index to the address already on the stack. After this is done, the stack
contains the address of the indexed array member and the value to be stored
there. A store (!) will finally put the value in the array.

Another routine could be written to fetch values from the array and would look
something like this :

    11 XYZ @  (NEW LINE)


Self Modifying Data Structures

A remarkable consequence of FORTH's ability to define new defining words is that
we may build 'intelligent' data structures; for example, arrays that
automatically maintain averages, or lists that re-order themselves whenever any
entry is altered.

To take the first of these examples, suppose we have a 10 element array
'READINGS' defined using a word similar to XYZ of the last example. To compute
the arithmetic average of the contents of this array requires adding together
all 10 entries and dividing by 10. A special definition could easily be written
to do this as follows:

: AVERAGE                   (take average of array 'READINGS')
        0
        11 0 DO
                I READINGS @ +
             LOOP
        10 / ;

If our FORTH application needed us to calculate an average like this often and
for many different arrays then, to simplify the overall program, we would define
a new defining word *ARRAY with the averaging function built into the DOES> part
of the definition:

: *ARRAY          ( 'special' array with running average )
        <BUILDS
                DUP ,    ( save array size )
                0 ,      ( set 'average' to zero )
                0 DO     ( step through elements )
                    0 ,  ( defining and zeroing  )
                LOOP
        DOES>
                DUP DUP @       ( get array size )
                SWAP 4 +        ( point to start of array )
                OVER 0 SWAP
                    0 DO        ( step through array )
                        OVER @ +       ( add up )
                        SWAP 2 + SWAP  ( bump up pointer )
                      LOOP
                SWAP DROP SWAP /   ( divide by array size )
                OVER 2 + !         ( store average in element 0 )
                2 + SWAP 2 * + ;   ( calculate address )

Arrays defined by *ARRAY may be used just like those defined by XYZ, for
example :

    10 *ARRAY READINGS

    10 1 READINGS !     ( readings(1)=10 )

    20 2 READINGS !     ( readings(2)=20 )

    1000 10 READINGS !  ( readings(10)=1000 )

    2 READINGS ?        ( print contents of readings(2) )
    20 OK

Which is exactly how we would expect a 10 element array, with elements numbered
from 1 to 10 to behave. But typing :

    0 READINGS ?      103 OK

will print the average of the values currently contained in the array
((10+20+1000)/10 = 103). This average will be calculated afresh every time the
name of the array 'READINGS' is executed and will always be true however many
times we might have altered the values stored in the array.

For example :

    870 10 READINGS !       ( alter readings(10) to 870 )

    50 6 READINGS !        ( set readings(6) to 50 )

    0 READINGS ?                 ( new average is 95 )
    95 OK

and, of course, all  arrays defined by *ARRY will have this function built in !!


14.3  Operating System Words

[_]        This word is used to suppress the execution of an immediate word in a
           definition. The immediate word which follows [_] will, if in a
           definition, be compiled to execute when the word being defined is
           executed and not during the compilation of the word itself.
           (Functionally equivalent to the FIG word [COMPILE])

(          Any words placed in brackets will not be compiled and will act as
           comments in your program. Anything entered up to a ")" will be entered
           as a comment.

,          Stores the 16-bit number found on the parameter stack into the
           dictionary at the next available location.

C,         This is like , but stores a byte into the dictionary rather than 2
           bytes (16 bits).

HERE       This word places the address of the next free dictionary space onto
           the stack.

H          This places the address of the memory location which contains the
           address of the next free dictionary space onto the stack.

T          Places the address of the memory location which contains the tail
           pointer of the dictionary onto the parameter stack.

HEAD       Is used in creating new defining words. HEAD creates the dictionary
           header of the word and links it into the dictionary. HEAD generates
           no code field and thus if a word is created with HEAD and no attempt
           is made to place behind it a code field, execution of that word will
           crash the system. (Functionally equivalent to the FIG word CREATE).

IMM        When embedded in a definition, IMM makes that word an immediate word
           and that word will execute during compile time, i.e. in a colon
           definition. IMM is used to customise compiler words which generate
           code of modify the dictionary without creating a header.
           (Functionally equivalent to the FIG word IMMEDIATE).

'          Attempts to find the word following the character in the dictionary.
           When found, the address of that word is placed onto the stack.

           ' M* HEX . (NEW LINE)       The  machine  code which makes up M* start
           B00 OK                      at 0B00 in memory. The ' is SHIFT/D on the
                                       ZX81.

15.0  Time & the System Clock

Computers, as you are no doubt finding, are very useful and versatile tools which
can do a surprising number of things. If you have been around people who do not
know a great deal about these tools, you may have been asked : "What can your
computer really do ? Can it cook dinner or vacuum the carpet ? What good is all
it if all you can do is stare at it ? And these are good questions. Well, of
course it can help with balancing the cheque-book, organising business
information, generate mailing lists, calculating taxes, writing out cheques,
playing games, and any number of other things, but there are a whole lot more
things that a computer cannot do at all well because computers, at least in their
simplest configuration, do not have eyes, hands, and/or a sense of time. In
short, computers cannot be told to do what humans can do because they do not have
the receptors and manipulators that we humans have. Most small computer systems
also lack the ability to keep track of time.

It would be possible to give your ZX81 some "sensory" devices or transducers
which would enable it to, in a limited way, perceive some things in its
environment by attaching to it input ports or A/D converters etc. You could also
give it hands, so to speak, by attaching to it output ports which could control
something in its environment.

After having given your computer these things, it would still be necessary to
give it a sense of time in order to link it to the way that the real world does
things. For instance, if you were collecting data in your house by monitoring the
temperature and using that information to control your boiler better, your
computer would, in all probability because of its speed, have the ability to take
a temperature reading once every 1/1000th of a second. Now it is obvious that
gathering this much information would be useless and wasteful, but if you had a
method of restricting the data-gathering process to read a temperature once a
minute, that data you collected could be analysed more rationally and the whole
project could be given a sense of orderliness.

The easiest way to give your computer a sense of time is to give it a clock that
it can look at every time you tell it to and so enable it to make decisions about
what to do and when to do it. ZX81-FORTH has just such a clock. It is made up of
a system variable that is incremented every 1/50th of a second and counts from
zero to over two years. Both the clock itself (the system variable that is
incremented) and the period (the changeable limit) are made up of 32-bit integers
which can be accessed by the two words :-

TIME       Which will place the address of the system variable which contains the
           clock count for the system. This variable is a 32-bit integer value
           which is incremented each clock tick (1/50th sec) and continues until
           it reaches the limit set by the system variable accessed by the word
           PER. Upon power-up, this variable will default to zero. In order to
           see the number of ticks since the computer was switched on type :

               TIME D@ D.

PER        Will place the address of the 32-bit system variable containing the
           limiting value to which the system clock counts. It is through this
           variable that the system clock is given its overall period. This
           variable defaults to a count that represents 24 hours or one day.

Two examples of how to use the clock are given here. The word SET is used to set
the clock with the current time and the word RTIME will enable you to display the
time of day.

    : READ BEGIN ." ?" S@ ># WHILE CR CO .W ." BAD" REPEAT ;

    SET ." HOUR" READ TH ." MIN" READ TM ." SEC" READ TS D+ D+ TIME D! ." DONE" ;

    : RD 60. D/ SWAP DROP ROT ROT ;

    : RD1 50. D/ SWAP DROP ROT ROT ;

    : CPT TIME D@ RD1 RD RD SWAP DROP ;

    : COL # C>N DROP 2 W> " : " + ;

    : RTIME CPT COL C>N DROP .CN COL .CN COL .CN DROP ;

    : TIME-DIS CLS BEGIN 13 EMIT RTIME AGAIN ;

The word READ is used to input one number to the stack much like an INPUT would
be used in BASIC. The ." ?" outputs a prompt to the screen. The S@ reads a
character from the input buffer (the keyboard), and the ># attempts a conversion.
If it converts to a number ok, control will then pass out of the READ word and
return with a valid number on the stack. If not the CR CO .W etc., will echo the
rejected character and return to the start of the loop. The SET word prompts for
input with an HOUR? and after a number has been input it runs TH which
manipulates the 16-bit number on the stack by the number of ticks in an hour and
leaves the result as a double number on the stack. The same is done for the
minutes and seconds leaving three double numbers on the stack which are than
added together with D+'s and deposited in the master clock variable with the
TIME D!. After it is all done it tells you by saying DONE.

The RD routine reduces a double number by dividing it by 60. It leaves the double
quotient on the top of the stack and a 16- bit remainder under it. The CPT
routine gets the 32-bit item from the computer master clock and runs through the
RD program to leave the ticks, seconds, and minutes on the stack. It then reduces
what is left, the hours, to a single number, so CPT reduces the time to hours,
minutes, seconds and ticks on the stack. COL converts a number to a character
string three characters long with a colon in the first location. RTIME puts the
other routines together and displays the time in the format HH:MM:SS to the
console. TIME-DIS just displays the time over and over in an infinite loop.


16.0  Tasking

ZX81-FORTH  is fundamentally different from  most other small computer operating
systems in that it allows the user to task programs. Tasking is the act of
scheduling a program to execute at some time in the future. Any program can be
scheduled in a task, you can run approximately ten tasks simultaneously in the
background before the system will slow down so much as to be useless in editing
new programs. (Tasks use valuable processor time which is usually spent in
editing new programs). How much the system slows down depends on what and how
often tasks are run.

    Tasks are set up in this way :

           TASK task-name program-name

Where program-name is any word which exists in the dictionary and task-name
becomes the name associated with the task you are defining. At this stage the task
has been defined, but has not yet been scheduled to execute.


Scheduling Tasks

The user can schedule a task to run using the IN, EVERY, AT words. The time
interval used can be :

           TT   Task Ticks (1/50th second)
           TS   Task Seconds
           TM   Task Minutes
           TH   Task Hours
           TD   Task Days
           TW   Task Weeks
           TY   Task Years

IN         Task identifier used to schedule a task to execute after the specified
           time has elapsed.

EVERY      This word is used by the task scheduler to schedule a task to execute
           repetitively using the period specified.

AT         Task identifier used in conjunction with the system clock to calculate
           the time existing between the current time and the time specified
           during scheduling so that the task will execute IN the appropriate
           time.

START      This word directs the task scheduler to clear the task overflow flag,
           the task execution flag, and the task execution queue to allow
           scheduling to continue.

STOP       This word will set the task schedule overflow bit which in effect stops
           the task's execution and scheduling.

RUN        Will increment the task execution queue if the overflow bit has not
           been set. The net effect is to schedule the task to execute the next
           clock tick if no other higher priority task is executing.

           The format for task scheduling is :

                Command  number  time-type     task-name
                TASK     TASK1   program-name
                EVERY    5       TS            TASK1

            This schedules the task TASK1 to execute every 5 seconds.

                IN 10 TM TASK1

This schedules the task TASK1 to run in ten minutes. So now TASK1 is scheduled to
execute every 5 seconds after ten minutes. The system will automatically start
scheduling this task upon the execution of this command.

To terminate the execution of a task the STOP command is used. The format of this
command is :

           STOP task-name    (NEW LINE)

To restart a task you must reschedule it, or if it has already been scheduled you
can use the START command.

Tasks may also be forgotten just as any other FORTH word.

This is possible because every task is a word in the dictionary. This means that
FORGET task-name (NEW LINE) could be used to stop the task as  well, however,
the task could not subsequently be rescheduled because the task definition would
no longer exist in the dictionary.

ZX81-FORTH also allows a task to be run without  scheduling it. This would be
useful in debugging a task to ensure that it is running properly. The command
is :

           RUN task-name   (NEW LINE)

Before we deal with the word START, let's ask a question. What would happen if
your task was extremely long ? That is, say, the task took longer than one second
to execute and yet was scheduled to execute one per second. In a case like this
the task would be rescheduled before it was completed, and the system would
eventually lock-up. A single task can be "back-scheduled" 63 times before the
system would lock-up.

Now back to START. START clears the task register of "back-scheduled" tasks and
will unlock a lock-up task. This has to be done for each task at a time and the
command format is :

           START  task-name   (NEW LINE)

LOCK       Prevents all tasks from running. Tasks are still being scheduled to
           execute during a LOCK condition, but whatever program is being
           executed when LOCK is executed will gain second to highest priority in
           the system (second only to the master 1/50th second task) and will not
           be interrupted by any other task.

UNLOCK     Allows tasks which have been LOCKed out to begin executing.

LOCK should be run only for a very short period of time.  This word locks all
lower priority tasks from running. If the LOCK to UNLOCK time was longer than the
time the lower priority task was scheduled to execute in, then the lower priority
task would be queued-up. LOCK does not stop the scheduling of tasks to be run, it
only stops their actual execution. Therefore, the possibility exists for a task
to completely fill it's queue buffer (63 scheduled operations), and upon
INLOCKing the tasks, the task with the overflowed queue would be blocked from
running and could only be released by a START.

TOFF        This word resets a system flag so that upon the execution of a WARM
            restart the following items occur :

            - Causes a LOCK of all tasks
            - Sets the background task to a null task
            - Forces the display to SLOW mode

            TOFF is the default state on power-up.

TON         Disables TOFF and allows scheduled tasks to execute after a WARM
            restart.

It is also possible to link a short program to run continuously in the
background. A program linked in such a way will execute any time that there is
nothing else going on in the system and in effect has the lowest priority of any
programs in the system. Programs which are put into the background must not
output any information to the console or request any input from the keyboard 
buffer. If a background task does, there is a high likelihood that the system
will not work properly. Background routines can schedule higher priority tasks to
run and can access any of the system variables just as other routines in the
system can, but the background routine must execute quickly, in the order of
1/10th second or less, or the system's overall performance will deteriorate.
Remember, though, that if the system slows down by 50% it will still be many,
many times faster than the ZX81 BASIC !!

BACK       Is used to link in a user routine into the background. BACK  program-
           name  (NEW LINE)  will make 'program-name' part of the background
           activity.

NUL        Is a program which does nothing. It is used to swap out non-empty
           tasks from the background. BACK NUL will put the default null task
           into the background.

           Try this :

               : A ." THIS IS A TEST " CR ;
               TASK B A
               : C RUN B ;
               BACK C

This program will take A, a program which prints out the line "THIS IS A TEST"
and attach a task B to it. The program "C", when executed, schedules B to execute
immediately. C is then put in the background so that any time the system is doing
nothing it schedules it to do something, namely execute A. To stop the message
from printing continuously to the screen just hit SHIFT/SPACE momentarily. This
will execute a WARM reset which automatically resets the background task to NUL.

One of the most useful tasks to run is a set of routines to print out the stack
contents on the bottom line of the screen. The entire program should be typed on
the editor screen. Then switch to the console screen (SHIFT/EDIT) and type CPL to
compile the entire editor screen.

    HEX CLS 16 CO 5 + C!
    0 17 1F 17 SCREEN ST ST REV
    : SCL 0 C N>C ST .W ;
    : STD # 5 W> ST .W ;
    : ST4 4 0 DO 4 I - PICK STD LOOP ;
    : STE SCL ST4 FA7E SP@ - 2/
    " SP = " ST .W STD ;
    TASK STK STE
    EVERY 1 TS STK DECIMAL

What is happening ?  The first line clears the console screen. The second line
creates the reverse video display line at the bottom of the screen. The screen
name is ST (for stack screen). The SCL word is a screen clear command. STD is a
screen display word. Finally, ST4 is the word which displays the top 4 stack
values. STE stands for stack execute, this being the execution part of the code.
The routine clears the screen (SCL), then displays the top 4 items (ST4), then
gets the stack pointer value and displays it. Lastly, the final statement is a
task which schedules the word STE as a task called STK, once per second.

The most useful application of multi-tasking are in conjunction with various
types of I/O (Input/Output), where the power of the computer can be used to
control things and events in the outside world. In fact you could say that the
whole future of computers as controllers is in that sort of role.

Any demonstration of tasking without employing I/O can tend to be trivial, and
an impressive demonstration of tasking can be carried out using the console
screen as follows :

If you set bit 8 of the screen byte it will reverse the video of that particular
part of the screen. The word BYTE will do this and it also incorporates an offset
so that an index can be applied.

    : BYTE DUP FBUF + @ 128 XOR SWAP FBUF + ! ;

    : CURSOR1 0 BYTE ;      : CURSOR2 2 BYTE ;

    : CURSOR3 4 BYTE ;      : CURSOR4 6 BYTE ;

    : CURSOR5 8 BYTE ;      : CURSOR6 10 BYTE ;

    TASK TASK1 CURSOR 1     EVERY 25 TT TASK1

    TASK TASK2 CURSOR 2     EVERY 25 TT TASK2

    TASK TASK3 CURSOR 3     EVERY 25 TT TASK3

    TASK TASK4 CURSOR 4     EVERY 25 TT TASK4

    TASK TASK5 CURSOR 5     EVERY 25 TT TASK5

    TASK TASK6 CURSOR 6     EVERY 25 TT TASK6

This produces a very graphic illustration of the multi-tasking capabilities if
ZX81-FORTH effectively giving a number of flashing cursors on the top line of the
console screen.


17.0  The CODE compiler

This section describes how machine code can be compiled. The advantages of
writing machine code are an increased execution speed and more compact programs
in terms of memory space used.

Machine code is a term referring to the type of numbers the Z80 microprocessor
inside the ZX81 will recognise. In reality, it will only see combinations of 0's
and 1's organised into data and instruction codes. It would be easier to deal
with these numbers in terms of HEXADECIMAL, which is method by which each group
of 4 bits is assigned a character between 0 to 9 and A to F. Now, it would be
very, very difficult to remember what every HEX number did inside of the Z80,
so every operation is represented symbolically by a mnemonic. In is common
practice to write source code in these mnemonics and then convert the mnemonic
to the proper HEX number either by hand or with the aid of an assembler.

First, the CODE compiler will be described, and then an example of its use will
be given. The code compiler has the following format :

        CODE ... hex code ... ;C

The above example shows the CODE compiler outside of a definition. It could also
be used inside a colon definition. The CODE compiler places code at the current
head pointer in the dictionary. Inside a definition you can have as many words
as you want before CODE and after ;C. Here is an example :

A machine code routine can be created to add the three numbers found on the
parameter stack and to put the result back onto the stack. We will use the HL and
DE registers for this, but first a little background information.

ZX81-FORTH supports commands for putting numbers onto the  parameter stack and
removing numbers from the parameter stack. To remove a number from the stack all
you have to do is execute a Restart 2 instruction (D7 hex). This instruction
takes the number off the parameter stack and places it into the HL register pair.
From there on you can use it in a machine level CODE definition. To take a number
from the HL register and place it on the parameter stack you must execute a
Restart 1 instruction (CF hex). Now let's write the routine :-

    E5   PUSH HL         ; This saves the contents of HL and DE
    D5   PUSH DE         ; by placing them on the processor stack
    D7   UPOP            ; Takes the top stack item and puts it into HL
    EB   EX DE,HL        ; swaps the contents of HL and DE
    D7   UPOP            ; Puts the 2nd item into HL
    19   ADD HL,DE       ; Adds HL & DE and puts the result in HL
    EB   EX DE,HL        ; Move answer of first add
    D7   UPOP            ; Get third number from stack
    19   ADD HL,DE       ; Adds the 3rd number with the sum of first two
    CF   UPUSH           ; Puts result back onto stack
    D1   POP DE
    E1   PUSH HL         ; Restore registers
 
No  return instruction is required as this is automatically inserted by the
outer-interpreter or the ";" at the end of a colon  definition.

In order to enter this code in the dictionary under the word "3+" the correct
programming format would be :

    : 3+  CODE E5 D5 D7 EB D7 19 EB D7 19 CF D1 E1 ;C ;

To execute 3+ place 3 numbers on the stack and use the new word.

        1 2 3 3+ .  (NEW LINE)
        6 OK

3+ adds the three numbers and replaces the sum, 6, onto the stack. "." prints the
top stack item.

It must be understood by the user that the FORTH interpreter first searches the
dictionary for an entry and then, if not found, treats it as a number. Therefore
if the user were to use the op-code ED the interpreter would find the word "ED"
in the dictionary, as this is the editor screen identifier, and would enter 0ED
as the op-code, and assuming that 0ED is not in the dictionary as a word, the
system will treat it as a number and compile the CODE correctly.

It also should be mentioned that the user should not use the EXX and EX AF,AF'
op-codes as this will upset the multi-tasking and video display mechanisms.


18.0  Applications

A definition of the FIG word SP!   to reset the stack would be :

    : SP! CODE FD 2A 90 FC ;C ;

A very useful routine follows and it this does the same thing as the READ A$
statement in BASIC.

    : READ ." INPUT REQUEST " S@ ;

This gets a string from the keyboard and places it on the character stack. To
display the result, type :-

    CO .W    (NEW LINE)

Here is a program to convert degrees Fahrenheit to degrees Centigrade. First,
let us read in a variable :

    : READ ." ENTER DEGREES FAHRENHEIT " CR ." ? " S@ ;

Next a word to convert the string to a number:

    : INPUT READ ># DROP ;

># converts the top of the character stack to a number. We must drop a number
because the conversion leaves a flag. Next is the actual conversion routine.

    : CEL 32 - 100 * 9 / 5 * 100 / ;

Note that the value must be scaled by 100 before performing the division. A later
division by 100 is needed to bring the result back to its original scale.

    : PRNT ." DEGREES CENTIGRADE " . ;

    : CELS BEGIN INPUT CEL PRNT CR CR AGAIN ;

To run the whole program type "CELS" and respond to the prompts.


19.0 Final Comments

19.1  Any problems ?

We are very anxious to ensure that you are satisfied with your FORTH software,
so we hope you will feel free to contact us should you have any problems or
queries.

We would prefer you to ring us on Bournemouth (0202) 302385 between the hours of
4pm and 5pm, Monday to Friday so as to allow our work to continue un-interrupted.

If you are using a Memotech Ram-Pack you will need to set the bit switches to the
following position :-

    1 and 4 UP, 2 and 3 DOWN

The system will work with any Ram-Pack which is compatible with the Sinclair 16k
or Memotech, i.e. those Ram-Packs that reflect all the way up to the memory map.
If you have a memory system which employs complete decoding and therefore does
not reflect its addressing up the memory map, it is unlikely that it will work
with this system. It should only be a simple modification to make it Sinclair
Ram-Pack compatible and you should contact the supplier of the Ram-Pack for
details.


19.2 Acknowledgements

The FORTH language was originally publicised by the

FORTH Interest Group
P.O. Box 1105 San Carlos
California
CA. 94070
USA

FIG UK can be found at

C/O Honorary Secretary
15 St Albans Mansion
Kensington Court Place
LONDON  W8 5QH


19.3  Copies

ZX81-FORTH is the copyright property of David Husband trading as Skywave Software
and all rights are reserved. ZX81-FORTH is supplied on an "as is" basis, with no
warranty, specific or implied, attaching. No liability will be accepted for
consequential loss or error. Any faulty media will be replaced free of charge.

This does not however affect any consumer rights under existing legislation.

Copyright of all software remains with the original authors. "Skywave  Software",
"Skywave", and the Skywave logo are Registered Trademarks.

We would ask you, therefore, not to make, or permit to be made, copies or give
copies to any third party (your friends, etc.) or sell copies.

We hope you will agree with us when we way that it is only by Software Vendors,
such as ourselves, making a reasonable return on our efforts, that the quality of
the software marketed will improve and prosper. You must realise that it if
piracy is rife the best software will never be put onto the market and prices
will remain high. We ask your co-operation in ensuring that this product is not
abused in this way.


20.0  Memory Map

FFFFH
      +------------------+
      ¦                  ¦
      ¦   Video RAM      ¦
      ¦                  ¦                +-----------------+
FD00H ¦------------------¦ --> -->  FD00H ¦                 ¦
      ¦                  ¦                ¦ Character Stack ¦
      ¦                  ¦                ¦                 ¦
FA80H ¦------------------¦          FCC0H ¦-----------------¦
      ¦                  ¦                ¦                 ¦
      ¦ Parameter Stack  ¦                ¦ System Variables¦
      ¦        ¦         ¦          FC40H ¦-----------------¦
      ¦        ¦         ¦                ¦                 ¦
      ¦        V         ¦                ¦ System Editor   ¦
      ¦                  ¦   PAD          ¦   Stack         ¦
      ¦                  ¦    ¦     FBC0H ¦-----------------¦
      ¦                  ¦    v           ¦                 ¦
      ¦                  ¦                ¦ Keyboard Input  ¦
      ¦                  ¦                ¦      Buffer     ¦
      ¦                  ¦          FB80H ¦-----------------¦
      ¦                  ¦                ¦                 ¦
      ¦                  ¦                ¦ System Execute  ¦
8000H ¦------------------¦                ¦     Stack       ¦
      ¦                  ¦        (FA80H) ¦-----------------¦
      ¦                  ¦       moveable ¦                 ¦
      ¦                  ¦                ¦ Parameter Stack ¦
      ¦        ^         ¦                ¦        ¦        ¦
      ¦        ¦         ¦                ¦        ¦        ¦
      ¦        ¦         ¦                ¦        V        ¦
      ¦        ¦         ¦                ¦                 ¦
      ¦ Dictionary Space ¦                ¦                 ¦
4000H ¦------------------¦                ¦                 ¦
      ¦ Extension RAM or ¦
      ¦      ROM         ¦
      ¦                  ¦
2000H ¦------------------¦
      ¦                  ¦
      ¦                  ¦
      ¦ ZX81-FORTH ROM   ¦
      ¦                  ¦
0000H +------------------+


20.0 Memory Map

APPENDIX A  --  The System Variables

System variables can be accessed by using the word +ORG

    HEX  0 +ORG    U. <NEW LINE>
    FC50  OK                      This gives the start of
                                  the system variables

PLORG     FC50
PGLOC     FC52    Page count for SAVE or LOAD
BAKCNT    FC54    Background count
MEMSIZ    FC56    Memory size
CLKB      FC58
CLIN      FC60
CLKPER    FC68    Period of one day
RMORG     FC6C
DSPBUF    FC6E    Display Buffer Base Address
TSKORG    FC70    Task Link Location
FENVAL    FC72    Fence Value Location
PRTVCT    FC74    Printer Vector
BLKLOC    FC76
WBYTE     FC78
CNVCT     FC7A    Number Converter Vector
BKVCT     FC7C    Background Task Vector
CTOPP     FC7E    Keyboard Top Pointer
CBOTP     FC7F    Keyboard Bottom Pointer
VIDGO     FC80
VIDRFS    FC82
CSPTR     FC84    Character Stack Pointer
BASEV     FC86    Current Base
TPTR      FC88    Tail Pointer
WPTR      FC8A    Word Pointer
BTPTR     FC8C    Backup Tail Pointer
BWPTR     FC8E    Backup Word Pointer
STKO      FC90    Stack Base
TSKVCT    FC92
CSST      FC94    Execution Stack Pointer
ESST      FC96    Editor Stack Pointer
SYBASE    FC98    System Base Vector
TFLAG     FCA5    Task Flag
KBVCT     FCA6
EDVCT     FCA8
KBDFLG    FCAA    Keyboard Flags
FLAGS     FCAD    System Flags
EDBASE    FCAE    Editor RAM Base Vector
CDBASE    FCB6    Console RAM Base Vector
PFLAG     FCBE    Printer Flags
PARSCT    FCBF    Token Character Count

Most of these addresses are already used by existing words in the dictionary. The
user alters these locations at his own peril !!


Quick Keyboard Reference

Key       Shifted Key    Shifted Key Function

1         EDIT           Toggles between screens
2         AND            Fetches a line from PAD
3         THEN           Puts a line into PAD
4         TO             Deletes a line from the editor screen
5         <              Moves the cursor left
6         v              Moves the cursor down
7         ^              Moves the cursor up
8         >              Moves the cursor right
9         GRAPHICS       Inserts a line on the editor screen
Q         ""             Compiles an editor screen line
Q         OR             Store word. Displayed as !
E         STEP           Fetch word. Displayed as @
R         <=             [ character
T         <>             _ character
Y         >=             ] character
U         $              $ character
I         (              ( character
O         )              ) character
P         "              " character
A         STOP           Clears the present screen
S         LPRINT         % character
D         SLOW           ' character
F         FAST           \ character
G         LLIST          ^ character
H         **             # character
J         -              - character
K         +              + character
L         =              = character
NEW LINE  FUNCTION       Home cursor to top left corner.
Z         :              : character
X         ;              ; character
C         ?              ? character
V         /              / character
B         *              * character
N         <              < character
M         >              > character
.         ,              , character"
SPACE     BREAK          WARM Restart, if held for 1/2 Second COLD restart.
