=================================
BUDGETER ROM Cartridge for TS2068
Timex Sinclair
=================================

THE BUDGETER
© Timex 1983

Loading time: 3 minutes 20 seconds

Plan your household budget for the next year. BUDGETER will help you compare
budgeted expenses versus actual expenses - using charts and bar graphs. It
will automatically compute the variance between budgeted and actual amounts.
If you have a printer, you can make copies of the screen displays.

TIMEX COMMAND CARTRIDGE INSTRUCTIONS
It you have the cartridge version of this software program please follow the steps
listed below:

1. Turn off your TS2000.
2. Lift cartridge door open.
3. Insert command cartridge with label side up.
4. Close cartridge door.
5. Turn on your TS2000.
8. Program will now begin execution.

If Step 5 does not occur - start over with Step 1 ... and reset cartridge once
again.

ALWAYS TURN OFF YOUR TS2000 BEFORE INSERTING OR REMOVING CARTRIDGE.

You may bypass tape load instructions below.

TO LOAD: Press LOAD "loader" start your tape recorder and press ENTER. The
program will load in 3 minutes 20 seconds, and starts automatically. Stop the
tape when asked to do so by the computer.

TO USE: Press ENTER for the title screen. Press ENTER again to see the menu
of options you have at your disposal, and an invitation to select one of them.
Simply press the number key on your TS2000 that corresponds to the option you
wish to use. We'll explain each of these options for you in these instructions,

NOTE: Always remember to press ENTER after typing anything with the flashing
L cursor showing at the bottom of the screen.

1. ADD ACCOUNT: Press 1. Before you can use any of the other options, you
must first feed information into the TS2000's memory. Here you will establish the
accounts, or categories of expenditure, for which you want to budget -
electricity, telephone, food, clothing, health, travel, etc.

Once you have planned your budget, you will want to save it on cassette, using
option 8 below. Option 7 allows you to reload the budget you earlier saved, and
update the file with your monthly expenditures using option 3. Options 2, 4, 5, 6.
and 10 allow you to examine the file and compere your budget with your actual
expenditures.

Unless you have already loaded a data file (see option 7), you will be informed
that the current file is empty, and if you wish to load a data file you must do 80
now. Therefore, press: y - to load a data file from cassette. This is the same as
option 7 below, offered here partly as a warning. If you intend to add new
accounts to an existing file, you must load the file first, then add the new
accounts to it. When you load a data file you clear any existing accounts from the
computer's memory.

n - to begin a new file. You are asked to input an account. The account name
must be eight characters or less in length (any combination of letters and
numbers)

The name you give an account now will be the name by which you must refer to it
in later options. After entering the account name, you will be shown the budget
worksheet for that account - with the months of the year listed down the left-
hand aide of the screen and columns labeled "Budget" and "Actual" for inputting
your budget numbers. You are asked to input your budget for each month in turn,
beginning with JAN. An arrow will help mark your place as you move down the
columns. Type in your projected budget for the first month (whole dollar amounts
only in this column - don't type the $). You are then asked to input your actual
expenditure for that month. It you are only planning your budget, enter a 0. Enter
your projected numbers for the remaining months in the same way. If you want to
plan a budget for less than a year, simply enter zeros for the months not
included in your budget.

After numbers have been entered for each month, you are asked if the data is
correct. Look it over. If you find an error, press n. Type the first three letters of
the month you wish to change - then enter the adjusted amount. Press y if you
have more corrections and follow the same procedure. Prass n to see the final
projected budget for the account. If you have a printer attached, you can press y
to make a copy of the screen or n to return to the menu. Select option 1 again to
add another account. Continue until your budget is complete

2. DELETE ACCOUNT: Press 2. Type in the name of the account to be deleted
and press ENTER. The account will be displayed - press y to delete it, or n to
return to the menu (in case you change your mind).

3. ADJUST ACCOUNT: Press 3. Here's where you enter your monthly
expenditures and compare them against your budget projections. Enter the
account name you wish to adjust. You will be shown the adjustment screen for
that account. Notice the third column labeled "Variance." "Variance" gives you
the difference between "Budget" and "Actual." If your actual expenditures are
less than the budgeted amount, variance will be a positive number. If you
exceeded your budget for the month, variance will be a negative number.

Enter the month you wish to adjust and the actual expenditure tor that month
{you may use decimals in the column for expenditures). You will also need to
repeat the budgeted amount - simply type if in exactly the way it appears on the
screen. It you wish to adjust your budget numbers, either upwards or downwards.
you can do so now. You may want to make such adjustments as you begin to see
further opportunities for tightening or loosening purse strings in individual
categories. Press n to finish - then press y 10 copy the Account Detail List (the
adjusted budget) to the printer, or n to return to the menu.

4. PRINT ACCOUNT OETAILS: Press 4 to view an account. Enter the name of
the account you wish to see. The Account Detail List shows you the budgeted
and actual figures and the variance for each month. (Notice this is the same
screen you see at the end of both options 1 and 3.)

5. LIST ALL ACCOUNTS: Press 5 for a listing of all accounts in the current data
file. 1 you have forgotten the name of an account, you will find it listed here.
Press y for a printer copy, or n to return to the menu.

6, COMPUTE TOTALS: Press 6 to see the composite totals for all accounts tor
each month as well as the year. Press y for a printer copy, or n to return to the
menu.

7. LOAD DATA FILE: Press 7 to load a data file from cassette. You are asked
for a file name. Type if in exactly the way you did when you saved the file (see
option 8), and press ENTER. Be sure you remove the original BUOGETER
cassette from your tape recorder, and replace it with the cassette containing the
data file you wish to load. Press the play button on your tape recorder. Stop the
tape when the menu returns to your screen. You can now update or delete
existing accounts, or add new accounts using option 1. Each data file will hold
up to 50 accounts, or categories.

NOTE: A single data file contains all the data for your entire budget. To
execute options 2 through 6, or 10, you must first load the BUDGETER
program then use option 7 to load the data. It is possible to nave several
data files should you want to keep separate budgets for household, auto,
business, etc.

8. SAVE DATA FILE: Press 6 to save the data file currently in the computer onto
a cassette. Be sure you have the MIC port on the TS2000 connected to the MIC
port on your tape recorder, and the tape is set to the beginning if it's a new tape
- or to location on a used tape where you will be sure not to record over
anything you wish to keep. You are asked to enter the name with which you want
to save the file - perhaps HOUSEHOLD, AUTO ... or even BUDGET. Type it in
and press ENTER. Start the recorder in RECORD mode and press any key. You
will be instructed to stop the tape when the save is complete. Press ENTER to
return to the menu. The file you saved is still in the computer and you can
continue to work with it. We recommend that you save a tile periodically to insure
against its being lost - for instance, through a power failure. It is also a good
idea to keep the previously saved version of the file on a separate tape as a
backup copy.

9. SAVE PROGRAM LOGIC: This option makes a backup copy of BUOGETER.
Should anything happen to the original you will have this copy to use. (Note the
entire program is saved, rather than simply a data file.)

10. GRAPHICAL ANALYSIS: Press 10 to see a bar graph representation of
either a single account or of the composite of the entire budget. Enter an
account name, or xxxx (four x's) for the composite. The budget for each month is
represented by a blue tine, the actual expenditure by a red line. Press y to send a
copy of the graph to the printer of n to return to the menu.

11. TERMINATE PROGRAM: Press 11, then press y to stop the program, or n
to return to the beginning without any loss of data.

LOADING INSTRUCTIONS:
(See Chapter 4 of your instruction manual for detailed instructions.)

1. First listen to the tape so you will be familiar with its distinct sections. The
tape has a period of silence at the beginning. followed by a high-pitched,
screechy noise. This is the computer program. The program is recorded twice on
the cassette in case one does not load.

2. Set the volume control on the cassette deck to about 3/4 of the maximum.
If you have tone controls, set the bass to minimum and treble to maximum. If you
have just one tone control, set it to HIGH or MAXIMUM.

3. Rewind the tape to the beginning. Connect the EAR jack on the computer
to the EAR jack on the cassette deck recorder. Make sure the plugs are clean
and securely in place.

4. To instruct the computer to accept the program you must press the LOAD
command and type the name of the program in quotation marks. See the
instructions of cassette for the correct loading name.

5. Start the cassette deck, allow a few seconds for it to get up to speed, then
press ENTER during the silence before the program begins.

6. The border of the TV screen will alternate between pale blue (cyan) and red,
during the time the computer is searching for the program on the tape.

7. When the program has been found, the screen border will show a pattern of
lines in the same shades of blue and red, and shortly the name of the program
will appear on the screen.

8. Next, as the program itself is being loaded into the computer, the border
pattern will become thinner, faster moving yellow and dark blue lines.

9. When the computer has finished loading the program, one of two things
will happen:

  1. Most commercial programs will begin running automatically, usually with a
  "title screen" or instructions to the user. (A title screen may tell you that the
  tape is still loading, if not, you should stop the tape immediately at this point
  so as to be in the proper position to load the next program if you wish.) or

  2. The screen will be blank, except for a 0 OK, 0:1 in the lower left hand
  corner. This is a report code and means that the computer has successfully
  loaded the program.
  Stop the tape immediately. To execute the program, you press RUN and
  ENTER. This will start the program.

SOME SUGGESTIONS
1. The volume at which the program is loaded is very important. Usually 3/4
maximum volume works best, but recorders vary and may require
experimentation with the volume setting. If you have a technical background you
can check the output level of your recorder's EAR/SPKR jack. It must be at least
4-volts peak-to-peak, although 5 to 6-volts peak-to-peak is best.

2. Clean and demagnetize the heads of the tape recorder. Your ears may not
pick up the signal fluctuations due to magnetic flux on the tape heads, but the
computer has a much more sensitive "ear."

3. The computer is very susceptible to outside interference. Working on a
metal table or near electrical appliances should be avoided.

4. Occasionally, once a program has loaded, the video display will show
instability. This can be corrected by adjusting the vertical hold on the television.
WARRANTY
There are no warranties which extend beyond the description on the face
hereof. No other warranty, whether express or implied, including the warranty of
merchantability, shall exist in connection with the sale of this product. In no
event shall Timex be liable for any consequential, incidental or special damages.

MODEL NO. 345-062000

© 1983 Timex Computer Corporation Waterbury, Connecticut 06725