=============================================
DISCIPLE Interface Manual for the ZX Spectrum
Rockfort Products
=============================================


                                 THE DISCIPLE

                       The multi-purpose interface from
                          Miles Gordon Technology for

                               ROCKFORT PRODUCTS

                                  USER MANUAL


                                Copyright 1987







                                 THE DISCIPLE

                          The multi-purpose interface
                         from Miles Gordon Technology
                            for Rockfort Products

                             INTRODUCTORY MANUAL


                               Copyright 1986



                                   NOTICE

This manual, and the information contained herein, is copyright material and
may not be reproduced, transcribed, stored in a retrieval system, translated
into any language or computer language, or transmitted in any form whatsoever
without the prior written consent of Miles Gordon Technology.

The manual is intended to provide the user with detailed information adequate
for the efficient installation and operation of the equipment involved.
However, while every effort has been taken to ensure accuracy, the manufacturer
and distributor assume no liability resulting from any errors or omissions in
this manual, or from the use of the information contained herein.

Miles Gordon Technology reserves the right both to change the specifications of
the Disciple and to revise this publication from time to time without
obligation to notify any person of such revision or changes.



                      Third Edition ......... August 1987


                                    CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION, Key Features ....................................   4
SETTING UP YOUR SYSTEM ........................................   5
MAKING THE DISCIPLE COMPATIBLE WITH YOUR SYSTEM ...............   7
USING A DISK DRIVE ............................................  17
Loading the DOS        (17)     The Autoload File        (25)
The Catalogue          (17)     Spectrum Reset Button    (25)
Disk Drive Syntax      (20)     The Snapshot Button      (26)
Saving and Verifying   (21)     Abbreviated Syntax       (27)
Loading a Program      (22)     Wild-Card Files          (28)
Breaking a Program     (23)     The Inhibit Button       (29)
Renaming a File        (23)     Formatting New Disks     (30)
Copying a File         (23)     Care of your Disks       (31)
Erasing a File         (24)     Error Reports            (32)
USING JOYSTICKS ........... 34  USING A PRINTER ...............  35
Snapshot Printing                                   (36)
Printing from a Commercial Word Processor           (37)
NETWORKING ....................................................  38
Setting up the Network                              (38)
The Shared Access Network                           (39)
The Independent Station Network                     (43)
USING OTHER PERIPHERALS .......................................  46
ADVANCED USER SUPPLEMENT - INTRODUCTION .......................  47
  APPENDIX A: ADVANCED DISCIPLE SYNTAX
    Reading from/Writing to a Sector                (48)
    Using Streams and Channels                      (48)
    The Execute File                                (50)
  APPENDIX B: THE POKE @ COMMAND                    (52)
  APPENDIX C: DISCIPLE COMMAND CODES                (55)
    User File Information Area                      (58)
    Examples of Command Codes in Use                (59)
  APPENDIX D: TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS              (62)
    Port details                                    (63)
    Disk connector - Pin description                (64)
    Printer connector - Pin description             (65)
QUICK REFERENCE GUIDE .........................................  66
GUARANTEE DETAILS .............................................  68
GUARANTEE REGISTRATION FORM ...................................  69



                                 INTRODUCTION

The Disciple is an interface which allows the Spectrum range of computers to be
connected directly and simultaneously to:

* One or two disk drives with the standard Shugart SA400 type connector. The
Disciple will accept 5 1/4" or 3 1/2" drives, whether they are 40 track or 80
track, single sided or double sided, single density or double density.

* Any Centronics parallel-type printer.

* One or two standard (Atari-type) joysticks.

* Most other standard Spectrum peripherals.

OTHER KEY FEATURES of the Disciple are:

* Rapid transfer speed: in double density mode, a 48K file can be loaded from
disk in approximately 3.5 seconds, a 128K file in less than 10 seconds.

* Large storage capacity: using two double sided, double density disk drives,
up to 1.56 Megabytes is available. None of the computer's memory is used by
the Disciple.

* A snapshot button allows instant transfer of everything held in the
computer's memory to disk.

* A powerful printer interface permits graphics and full-screen printing; a
unique facility is that the Disciple can interrupt a game at any point and
print out the entire graphics screen.

* Two network connectors provide a network which is compatible with Sinclair
Interface 1; with the Disciple attached, up to 63 computers can interact in a
system using a single disk drive or printer.

* All the Disciple interfaces use a simplified syntax similar to the Spectrum's
own BASIC. Or the normal Microdrive commands can be used, if preferred.

                                4

SETTING UP YOUR SYSTEM

IMPORTANT: Before connecting any peripheral to your computer, always disconnect
the power supply first. Failure to do so could damage your computer.

With the power off, carefully connect the peripherals you are using into their
sockets. The front half of your Disciple will fit neatly underneath the computer,
supporting it at a convenient typing angle. When the Disciple is in place, tighten
the screws at the base of the unit for a secure attachment to the computer. If you
normally use the Sinclair Interface 1, do not connect it yet; you will be told how
to use Interface 1 with the Disciple in the later section - The Inhibit Button.

Press the Inhibit Button twice. You will notice that when the Inhibit Button
is on, it will lock into place; when it is off, it will spring out of the lock.
Make sure that the Inhibit Button is off before you start work.

                                5

For the first steps, you will need to have your cassette recorder attached to
the Spectrum in the normal way.

Connect the power and the normal Spectrum introductory screen will appear on
your monitor/TV. Turn on the disk drive power and insert a blank disk.

If you are using a Spectrum 12BK or Plus 2, go into the Edit node, and then
move the cursor to select Screen. Then press ENTER. This has the effect of
removing the logo from the bottom of the screen, and the commands that you
enter will appear at the bottom of the screen instead of at the top.

                                6

MAKING THE DISCIPLE COMPATIBLE WITH YOUR SYSTEM

The Disciple has been designed to work with a wide variety of disk drives and
printers, but each of these may have a slightly different mode of operation.
To enable the Disciple to be compatible with your system, therefore, your first
step is to give the Disciple instructions telling it which peripherals you are
using, and how you intend to use them. You will only need to do this the first
time you use your system, because the information will then be permanently
stored on disk, ready for use as soon as you connect the Disciple.

This is how to set the parameters for your system.

* Load the cassette tape supplied with your Disciple as follows:

- Set up your system - including a cassette recorder - as shown in the diagram.
Insert the cassette in your cassette recorder, and set the recorder's volume
level at about 3/4 of maximum volume.
- Type                       LOAD ""
- Press                      ENTER
- Press "Play" on your cassette recorder.

* While the program is loading, insert a floppy disk into your disk drive.
(If you are using two disk drives, you must insert it into drive 1 - your disk
drive manual may refer to it as drive A). If possible, use a floppy disk which
has never been used before.

* Wait until the message "Press any key to continue" appears on the screen.
(If this message does not appear at the end of loading, check that the lead
from the recorder into the computer has been correctly attached - refer to your
Spectrum manual. If the connections are correct, try adjusting the volume
level on the recorder and start again. Red and blue horizontal lines on the
screen during loading should indicate that the program is loading properly.

* Press any key. You will then be asked a series of simple questions about
your system. Type in the answers to each of the questions in turn, remembering
to press "ENTER" when you are satisfied that your answer is correct. If you
make a mistake, don't worry; you'll be offered the opportunity to go through
the questions again at the end, if you need to.

                                7

These are the questions you'll be asked. Study them and decide on the answers
before you start work on the computer. Write your answers in pencil on the
dotted lines below, so that you have a record of the values you enter - in case
you wish to change them later.

1(a) Is disk drive 1 a 40 track drive?      (Your answer) ...Yes/No...

 (b) Is disk drive 1 an 80 track drive?                   ...Yes/No...

        You answer these questions by entering y (= yes) or no (= no). If you
        answer no to both questions, you will be told: You must have a disk
        drive 1.

 (c) Is disk drive 1 double sided?                        ...Yes/No...

        If you answer no, the Disciple assumes that disk drive 1 is single
        sided.

        On a number of occasions, new users have called us to say that when
        they try to answer this question, the computer gives a "Nonsense in
        Basic" error message, and they are unable to proceed any further. If
        this happens, it's because proper contact is not being made between
        the computer and the Disciple. In most cases the cause will be
        either:
          a) The computer's edge connector is dirty or fractured; or
          b) The computer has a fault on the M1 line. Unfortunately, this
             seems to be a fairly common occurrence amongst all types of
             Spectrum. The fault only shows itself when devices dependent
             upon the M1 line - such as Interface 1 or the Disciple - are
             connected.
        If you have this problem, then:
          i) Try the Disciple with another Spectrum. (Use the other
             Spectrum's power supply too, in case the problem lies there.
          ii) If (i) works, try cleaning your computer's edge connector, then
             reconnect the Disciple and try again. If you still have no
             success, it means a visit to the repair shop for your computer.
          iii) If (i) falls, then follow the instructions in the Guarantee
             Details at the end of this manual and return the Disciple to us.

                                8

 (d) Is disk drive 2 a 40 track drive?                    ...Yes/No...

 (e) Is disk drive 2 an 80 track drive?                   ...Yes/No...

        If you answer no to both these questions about disk drive 2, it is
        assumed that you are not using a second disk drive, and you will be
        asked question 2 onwards. If you answer yes to either question, you
        will also be asked:

 (f) Is disk drive 2 double sided?                        ...Yes/No...

        If you answer no, the Disciple assumes that drive 2 is single-sided.

2. Enter disk drive stepping rate in milliseconds.        ............

        Normally, the setting will be 6 milliseconds - your disk drive manual
        will probably tell you. Some older drives and 3" drives may have a
        slower stepping rate. Typically, this might mean that when you come
        to the "Format" command later, formatting may not be successful. In
        this is the case, try slowing the stepping rate down to 12. All you
        type in here is the appropriate number.

3(a) Are you using the Disciple's printer port?           ...Yes/No...

        Answer no if you're not using a printer, yes if you're using
        Centronics/parallel printer. But if you are using any other sort of
        printer (for example, a serial printer connected to Interface 1, or
        the ZX printer connected at the through port) you should also answer
        no. If you answer no, you will move straight on to question 4.

 (b) Would you like to configure the printer?             ...Yes/No...

        It will probably be unnecessary to configure the printer if you are
        using an Epson-type printer, because the utilities software has
        already been set up to allow the Disciple to work with these printers.
        If you answer no, you will then be asked question 4 onwards.

                                9

        Answer yes to this question if you are using any other sort of
        Centronics parallel printer. You'll need to refer to the section on
        printer control codes in your printer manual to answer the following
        questions. If you have difficulty, your dealer should be able to help.

        In the next questions, which require more than a Yes/No answer, press
        ENTER when you are sure that you have typed in your answer correctly.

 (c) Enter decimal values, separated by commas, for printer initialisation.
                                                          ............

        In your printer manual, find the code for initialising the printer.
        The manual will refer to an ASCII code, and decimal and hexadecimal
        values. Here, and in the questions which follow, enter the decimal
        values, separated by a comma.

        If you cannot find the code for initialisation in your printer manual,
        simply type in 13 - which is the decimal code for a carriage return.

        (You can also simply press ENTER, in which case the Disciple will
        automatically default to the pre-set Epson printer code - the default
        for initialisation is 27,64.)

 (d) Enter the number of line feeds after a carriage return. ............

        No decimal codes this time, just the number of line feeds you need.
                                        (Default: 1)

 (e) Enter control codes in decimal for character pitch.     ............

        Character pitch means the number of characters printed per inch
        (expressed as CPI). Your printer may allow you to select Near Letter
        Quality (normally 10 CPI); or in draft mode, pica pitch (also 10 CPI),
        elite pitch (12 CPI), condensed pitch (17.16 CPI), and perhaps
        condensed elite pitch (20 CPI).

        Choose the pitch you wish to use and find the control codes in your
        printer manual. Type In the decimal values, separated by commas.

                                10

        Normal pitch is generally pica. If your printer manual does not give
        a control code for pica but you wish to use pica pitch, try the code
        for cancel elite pitch or cancel emphasised print instead.
                                        (Default 27,80)

 (f) Enter the number of spaces before your left-hand margin ............

        Simply type the number of spaces you need.
                                        (Default: 1)

 (g) Enter line width as number of characters per line.      ............

        With normal A4-sized paper, most printers will allow you to print up
        to 80 characters per line in pica, or 132 characters in condensed
        character mode. Some printers allow you to load wider sheets of paper
        so that you can print up to 255 characters per line - particularly
        useful for spreadsheets. Check the capabilities of your printer, then
        decide how many characters per line you wish to print, and enter this
        as a number in answer to the question.
                                        (Default: 80)

        (Note that the line width you define will be the maximum width
        available. If you are using a word processing program which permits
        64 characters per line and you have set your printer line width at 80,
        then only the first 64 character spaces on each line will be printed
        and you will have a blank margin on the right-hand side equivalent to
        16 character spaces. Similarly, if you copy a Spectrum screen, you
        will produce a print-out 32 characters wide and 24 characters deep
        only - because these are the dimensions of the Spectrum screen.

        If you want to, you can centre these print-outs on your paper by
        changing the left-hand margin settings later.)

 (h) Enter control codes in decimal for printing n/72 inch line spacing.
                                                         ............

        In your printer manual, you will be offered several different options
        for line spacing. Find the control codes for setting n/72 inch line

                                11

        spacing. The decimal code will have numeric values and will then ask
        you to type in a value for "n". Don't worry about the n; simply type
        in the numeric values as shown, separated by commas.
                                        (Default: 27,65)

 (i) When printing text, what line spacing do you wish to use?
                                                         ............

        Normal single-line spacing is 12/72" - here you would enter 12.
        Double line spacing is 24/72" - here you would enter 24. Enter the
        number you select.              (Default: 12)

 (j) Enter control codes in decimal for bit-image character mode (= graphic
      character printing)                                ............

        This is the code required if you wish to print user-defined or screen
        graphics (for example, if you wish to copy a screen from a game to
        your printer). Find the section in your printer manual dealing with
        dot graphics or bit image. You may be offered a choice of single,
        double or quadruple density graphics mode. Single density allows a
        print-out at normal character size; if you are copying a screen, your
        print-out will have a line-width equivalent to 32 characters. Double
        density will print at half this size and quadruple density at quarter
        size.

        The decimal value for the mode you choose will probably be stated in
        your manual in a format similar to:
                27   75   (n1)   (n2)   (data1)   (data2)
        When you type in the code you only need to enter the figures before
        n1, separated by commas.        (Default: 27,75)

 (k) Do you want to print the graphics characters for ), # and # ?
                                                          ...Yes/No...

 (l) Are there any other control codes from your printer manual which you wish
     to set permanently? Enter the decimal values consecutively here,
     separating each value with a comma.
                           ....................................

                                12

        We have now dealt with all the important printer control codes,
        However, your printer will probably offer you many more options; if
        you need any of them, you type them in now. You may wish to print in
        italics - the Epson decimal values are 27,52; and you may wish to set
        the left-hand margin 8 characters further in so that you centre a 64
        character line on the paper - the Epson code would be 27,108,8. If
        these were the extra control codes you wished to enter, you would
        type:           27,52,27,108,8

        Note that you can only do as much as your printer allows you to do.
        For example, some printers will not allow you to use condensed or
        emphasised print in Near Letter Quality. Thus, if you entered the
        codes when the printer is in this mode, they would not work.

        Also note that if you wish to come back to this program later to
        change some of the settings, you must retype all the codes, not just
        the ones you are changing. If you change one of the codes only, the
        Disciple will revert to the default codes for all the others.

4.  Would you like the borders to flash during disk operation?
                                                          ...Yes/No...

        (We find it useful to keep the borders flashing, to show that
        everything's performing well; but we know that some users prefer the
        plain screen. Our suggestion: try with borders flashing at first. If
        you don't like it you can always come back and change it later.

5(a) Are you using the network?                           ...Yes/No...

        If you answer yes, you are asked:

 (b) Are you the master machine in a shared access network?
                                                          ...Yes/No...

        A shared access network is one in which a number of computers are
        linked together, all sharing a single disk drive and a single printer
        between them. The master machine is the computer to which the disk
        drive and the printer are attached.

                                13

        If you answer yes to this question, you will automatically be
        identified as station number 1 and your operating system will include
        he routines required to control a shared access network. You will
        then be asked question 6(a).

        If you answer no, you are asked:

 (c) What station number are you?                        ............

        If yon enter a station number between 2 and 9 then you will be
        recognised as one of the "assistant" stations in the network. (An
        assistant station is one which has its own disk drive, but which is
        not actually the master - which is always station number 1. If you
        enter a station number between 10 and 63, then you will be a "pupil"
        station - in other words, a station without its own disk drive or
        printer. (Refer to the section on networking later in the manual for
        more details of master, assistant and pupil stations.)

        If you enter station number 0 then you will switch off the network
        facilities.


        After setting up the network, yon have completed your SYSTEM FILE.
        You may be satisfied with your answers and ready to save the system
        file to disk, or you may wish to retype some of your answers. Check
        that you have a disk in disk drive 1, and then go on to answer the
        final questions, which may include:

6(a) Would you like to format a disk?                     ...Yes/No...

        Answer yes only if you're now satisfied with all your answers, and you
        are using a brand new disk or wish to erase files previously stored on
        the disk. Be very careful not to format a disk which contain any
        files you wish to keep - formatting wipes the disk clean.

        If you answer no, you will then be asked question 7.

                                14

 (b) In double density?                                   ...Yes/No...

        Answer yes if you have a double density disk drive. If you answer no,
        the Disciple will assume you are working in single density.

 (c) Are you sure?                                        ...Yes/No...

        Are you sure you want to format? - a final check. If you answer yes,
        your disk in drive 1 will be formatted and the system file which you
        have created will be saved automatically at the same time. We call
        the disk which contains your system file the SYSTEM DISK. After
        formatting (which takes a minute or two), you'll be asked question 9.

        You may find at this stage that the formatting cannot be completed.
        If this happens, go through the utilities program again trying the
        following:
          i)  Use a different disk. If this doesn't work:-
          ii) Change the stepping rate - if last time you typed in 6
              milliseconds, try 12, then 24, then 40, then 64. If, after
              these attempts, there's still no success:
          iii) Format in single density instead of double density - some older
              disk drives struggle to work in double density.
          iv) Check (with your dealer) that the drive is of the right type -
              i.e. BBC-computer compatible (= Shugart 400 standard) and with a
              standard BBC-type cable. Try using another drive - perhaps the
              heads on your drive are not centring or need cleaning.
          v)  If none of these attempts work, return the Disciple to us,
              following the instructions in Guarantee Details.

7.  Would you like to save the system file?

        If you chose not to format your disk, it may have been because you did
        not want to erase old files on it. However, you may be satisfied with
        your system file and ready to save it. If you answer yes to this
        question, the system file will be saved to disk, but the disk will not
        be formatted. You'll then go to question 9.

        If you are not satisfied with your system file answers, type no.

                                15

8.  Would you like to repeat?

        If you are not satisfied with some of your previous answers, enter yes
        and you will be returned to the beginning of the utilities program.
        You may wish to change only one of your previous answers. However,
        you should type the correct answers to all the questions, not simply
        to the one that you wish to change now.

9.  Would you like to save this utilities program on disk?

        You won't need the utilities program again unless you change your disk
        drives or decide to change the printer controls or to use the network
        in a different way. But if you are likely to change any of these
        later, answer yes; you'll save time if you can load the utilities
        program from disk instead of cassette. If you answer yes, you'll see
        that the files "loader", "mover", "music" and "copysys" are saved to
        disk and appear in the disk directory, which is now automatically
        displayed. If you need the utilities program later, load the file
        called "loader".


Your system disk now contains all the information necessary to make the
Disciple's disk, printer and network interfaces compatible with your system.
From this point onwards, all you'll need to do is load your system disk and
you'll be ready to start work.

We recommend that you copy the system file onto several disks ready for future
use. You'll learn how to do this later in this manual, in the section
Formatting New Disks.

                                16

USING A DISK DRIVE

(Before you start using the Disciple with a disk drive, please follow the
instructions in the previous section - "Making the Disciple compatible with
your system".)

Loading the Disk Operating System

Connect the computer, the Disciple and the disk drive(s) to the correct
connectors, and then turn on the power. The normal title screen for the
computer will be displayed.

Insert your system disk in disk drive 1. (Your manual may call it drive A.)

Type RUN, then ENTER. The disk unit will come to life and the operating system
will be loaded. When loading is complete, the screen will display:

        Miles Gordon Technology DOS 3b

and an OK message - O.K.  GDOS 3,0:1

Some users have found that the Miles Gordon Technology copyright message
appears but not the O. . message, and the computer keyboard appears to have
locked up. This has been because they have indicated that they are using the
Disciple's printer port as they set up their system disk, but have then failed
either to connect the printer or to switch it on (it should be on-line). Press
the BREAK key to unlock the computer and allow the "system" to finish loading.

The Catalogue

To find out what programmes are stored on your system disk, type:
        CAT 1 (or CAT 2 if you wish to access drive 2) - ENTER

In about two seconds the screen will display:
        - The heading Disciple Disk 1 (or 2) Directory.
        - A list of files on the disk with various comments. (The maximum
          number of files is 80).
        - The amount of space left free on the disk in kilobytes.

                                17

Each directory entry is in the form of a file name which can be up to ten
characters long in either upper or lower case characters. The file names are
not listed in alphabetical order, but in the order in which they were saved to
disk.

A typical catalogue screen is as follows:

         1   system           14     CDE            0,6656
         2   loader           11     BAS          500
         3   mover             1     CDE        49000,60
         4   music             4     CDE        40300,1750
         5   copysys          14     CDE        42800,6656
         6   snap F           97     SNP 48K
         7   screen           14     SCREEN$
         8   listing          34     M/DRIVE
         9   data              8     SPECIAL
        10   numeric           4     D.ARRAY
        11   character         5     $.ARRAY

        Number of free K-Bytes = 677


In the first column the program number is shown. This is automatically
selected by the Disciple. When you save a file, the Disciple will place it in
the first available space in the directory. Thus, if you erased file number 9,
the next program you saved would become the new program 9.

The second column is for the file-name - up to ten characters long.

The third column shows the number of disk sectors used. In double density each
sector holds 512 bytes, so divide the number of sectors shown by 2 to find out
the approximate number of kilobytes used to store the file. In single density,
each sector holds 256 bytes, so divide by 4 if you need to know the number of
kilobytes used.

                                18

The fourth column is for the type of file:
        BAS     = Basic
        CDE     = Code
        SNP 48K = 48K Snapshot file
        SNP128K = 128K Snapshot file
        SCREEN$ = Screen file
        M/DRIVE = Microdrive file
        SPECIAL = Special file, as used by some software
                  houses - for example, word processing files,
                  editor/assemblers
        D.ARRAY = Data array
        $.ARRAY = Character array
        OPENTYP = File created by OPEN # statement
        EXECUTE = Execute file
You may not fully understand the significance of all these different types of
file yet. There will be further explanation later in the manual, and the
regular newsletters published by the Disciple Users' Club explore the more
specialised file-types in detail.

The right-hand column in the catalogue tells you the starting address of the
file and, after the comma, the number of bytes used if it is a code file. If
it is a file in Basic, the number will show the line at which the program
starts.

The amount of free space left on the disk is displayed in kilobytes at the
bottom of the screen.

If your directory fills the screen, and you wish to scroll down to the next
screen, press ENTER.


You can also display an abbreviated directory by typing CAT 1! (or CAT 2!).
This would show the same directory in the following format:

        system       loader         mover         music
        copysys      snap F         screen        listing
        data         numeric        character

                                19

Both the full and the abbreviated directory can be listed on screen
simultaneously. Or you could, for example, list disk 1 in full and disk 2 in
the abbreviated form.

If you wish to print out the catalogue on your printer, you can use the special
CAT #3 command. For example, to send the catalogue on drive 1 to the printer,
you enter:
                CAT #3;1
To print an abbreviated catalogue from drive 2, you would enter:
                CAT #3;2!



Disk Drive Syntax

When you use the Disciple and a disk drive, Basic commands typed on the
computer keyboard are followed by a Syntax Separator - a code to let the
computer know that the instructions are directed toward the disk drive, and
not, for example, toward a cassette recorder.

For ease of explanation in the manual, the syntax operator will be referred to
as D1, meaning that the instruction is for drive number 1. However, when you
are working on the computer, the following options are also available:

        D1 or d1   = a command for drive 1
        D2 or d2   = a command for drive 2
        D* or d*   = a command for the last drive in use

(Programmers should note that D* is particularly useful when your disk file
autoruns and calls up another file on the same disk unit. You should also note
that a variable can be assigned for drive number 1 or 2 but not for *.)

By typing an upper case D rather than a lower case d when saving a file, the
abbreviated disk catalogue will be displayed automatically when the save is
complete. A new catalogue also appears automatically if you type an upper case
D when erasing or renaming a file.

                                20

(For those who are familiar with the Sinclair Microdrives, note that you can
use Sinclair Microdrive syntax with the Disciple. For example, to load a file
from drive 1, you could type:
        LOAD *"m";1;"file-name"
In this case, the syntax operator D1 is replaced by *"m";1;
For further details of Microdrive commands, refer to the Microdrive manual.)


Saving a File and Verifying

On the ZX Spectrum, you save programs on cassette using statements which you
are probably familiar with. As an example, type in this short program called
Squares:

        10  REM   Squares
        20  FOR   n=1 TO 10
        30  PRINT n,n*n
        40  NEXT  n

To save on cassette, you would type:

        SAVE "Squares"          ENTER

To save the program on the disk in drive 1, you type:

        SAVE D1 "Squares"       ENTER

(Remember that D1 can be either d or D, 1 or 2 or *)

The screen border will flash, and after about 2 seconds the program will be
saved. Try it and see.

As described in the last section, if you have SAVEd using a capital D, the disk
directory is automatically displayed. If you have done the example, you will
see the program Squares shown on the directory as the last entry, followed by
BAS (showing that this is a BASIC program file), and then the figure 1 (showing
that 1 sector has been used).

                                21

If you wish, you can now do a further check to ensure that the program has been
saved, by entering:

        VERIFY D1 "Squares"

Provided the program has been saved correctly, the screen will display the OK
message. (If you ever have difficulty with saving a file, check that you have
started with a formatted disk - see the later section in this manual.)

Now, with the program saved to disk, you can clear it from the Spectrum's
memory by entering:

        NEW


Loading a program

Next, you can re-load the program Squares by entering:

        LOAD D1 "Squares"

The program will be loaded when the OK message appears. But so far we haven't
typed in an instruction which will make the program run. Let's do that now by
entering:

        SAVE D1 "Squares" LINE 10

Of course, we already have a program called Squares on the disk, so you will be
asked if you wish to overwrite the old one. You must enter either Y (= Yes) or
N (= No).

We will enter:      Y
Then:    LOAD D1 "Squares"

By now, you will probably have realised that all the normal Basic statements
that are used with a cassette-based system can be used with the Disciple and a
disk drive - with the simple addition of the short syntax operator, D1.

                                22

Breaking into a Program

To break into the program and stop Squares running, use the normal Spectrum
command - BREAK.

Note that BREAK will stop the computer running all normal routines, but it will
have no effect during a disk read/write operation until the disk activity has
been completed.


Renaming a file

To rename a file, we use the two keywords ERASE and TO. For example, to rename
your program Squares as Example 1, you enter:

        ERASE D1 "Squares" TO "Example 1"

The catalogue which automatically appears (if you have typed in a capital D)
confirms that the file-name has been changed.

Note that your file-names can be any combination of letters and numbers - or
even spaces - but the maximum number of characters you can use is ten. The
Disciple allows you to type your file-names in upper or lower case letters (or
both); in the catalogue, the file-names will appear exactly as you originally
typed them, but when you re-load a file it will not matter if letters
originally typed as lower case letters are changed to upper case or vice versa.


Copying a file

To copy a file we use the keywords SAVE and TO, Try copying the program you
have written by entering:

        SAVE D1 "Example 1" TO D1 "Newcopy"

You will see that before the copy is made, you are given the opportunity to
change the disk. It you don't need to change the disk, simply press the SPACE
bar and the file will be copied with the new file-name.

                                23

You could also give the instruction:

        SAVE D1 "Example 1" TO D1

This would mean that you wished to copy the file onto drive 1 and to keep the
same file-name. This is obviously useful if you wish to make a back-up copy of
a file onto another disk. Again, you are given the opportunity to change the
disk before you press the SPACE bar to make the copy. If you don't change the
disk but press the SPACE bar, you'll be given the message that the "File-name
exists" and you'll be asked whether you wish to overwrite the existing file.
Press Y (= yes) to overwrite, or N (= no) to cancel the command.

If you are using two disk drives with the Disciple, you can also copy a file
from one drive to the other, using the syntax:

        SAVE D1 "File-name" to D2

If you add a file-name after D2, the new copy will have this as its new file-
name; otherwise, the new copy will have the same name as the original file.

When copying is complete there is an automatic NEW instruction to the computer
and the computer's title screen is displayed. To check that the copy has been
made, call the CATalogue by entering CAT 1.


Erasing a file

Suppose you have finished with the program now called Example 1. To erase it
from the directory of the disk, enter:

        ERASE D1 "Example 1"

During the ERASE, the border will flash, and the catalogue will be displayed
automatically (if a capital D has bees typed), showing that the file is no
longer available and that more space on the disk has been made free.

(Programmers -note that, unlike Interface 1, the Disciple returns an error
message if you try to ERASE a non-existent file. When using programs
originally written for Microdrive with the Disciple, you will sometimes have to
delete an ERASE command in the listing to avoid the error message.)

                                24

Creating an Autoload file

An autoload file is one which loads as soon as you RUN the operating system;
you are allowed one autoload file per system disk.

For an illustration of an autoload file, let's rename the file Newcopy. Enter:

        ERASE D1 "Newcopy" TO "Autoload"

The new catalogue should tell you that the file is now called Autoload. Now
turn off the power to your Spectrum; everything in the computer's memory,
including the disk operating system will be lost.

Turn on the power again and load the operating system from your system disk by
entering RUN. Your Autoload file (which, you'll remember, is the original
Squares program) will be loaded at the same time, and instead of the normal
Disciple title screen you'll see the Squares program running.

If, however, you do not want your autoload program to autoload, then enter:

                RUN boot
instead of:
                RUN


Using the Spectrum's Reset Button

If you use a ZX Spectrum +, a ZX Spectrum 128K, or a Spectrum 128K+2, your
computer will have a reset button which allows you to reset your system without
having to turn off the power.

But when you press the computer's reset button once, the Disciple still retains
the operating system in its own memory. You don't have to reload the Disciple's
operating system - you can just carry on giving normal Disciple commands.

However, if the computer's reset button is pressed twice consecutively, the
Disciple's operating system is no longer retained in memory. To be able to use
Disciple commands, you will first have to load the operating system from your
system disk (or technically, "boot up") afresh.

                                25

Saving a file with the Snapshot Button

By holding down the CAPS SHIFT key on your Spectrum's keyboard and then
pressing the Snapshot bottom on the Disciple once at any time during the course
of a program, you are able effectively to "take a photograph" of anything held
in the computer's memory at that time, and save it to the last drive in use,
shown by the indicator light on the disk drive.

Make sure that the Disciple is connected and that your system is booted up with
the system disk in drive 1. Then load in any program (a game is best for
demonstration) in the normal way - from disk or from cassette. (If you're
loading from cassette, use the Spectrum's normal LOAD "" command.)

When the program has loaded, press CAPS SHIFT and the Snapshot Button
simultaneously. You'll notice that your program will be frozen at its current
status, and you will see a number of thin multi-coloured lines filling the
borders. You now have the following options:

Press key 3 on the Spectrum to save only the current SCREEN. A screen save
will occupy 7k of memory space on the disk. The border will flash until the
save is complete, and when the flashing has finished, you can continue with the
program from the point at which you left it.

Press key 4 on the Spectrum for a 48K PROGRAM to be saved to disk. Every time
you save a 48K file, 48K of memory space (or actually 97 sectors) will be used
on the disk. When you press key 4, the borders will flash, showing that the
program is being saved. When the borders stop flashing, the save will be
complete and the program will resume from the point at which you left it. (If
you want to, you can take more snapshots at later points in the program until
your disk is full. If your drive has a capacity of 780K and you are using an
empty formatted disk, the maximum camber of 48K snapshot saves you could take
would be 16.)

Press key 5 on the Spectrum for a 128K PROGRAM to be saved to disk. Every time
you save a 128k file, 128K of memory space will be used on the disk (= 258
sectors). Again, the borders will flash for a few moments, but then the
program will appear to be frozen again. If the picture on your screen (the
picture - not the border) has changed, press key Y (= yes) on the Spectrum; if

                                26

the picture has not changed, press the key N (= no) on your Spectrum. The
borders will then continue to flash until your 128K save is complete, You will
then be able to resume from the point at which you left the program.

If you have loaded the program on drive 1, but wish to save your snapshot file
to drive 2 - or vice versa - press the CAPS SHIFT key on the Spectrum at the
same time as pressing key 3, 4 or 5.

When you've saved a snapshot file, press the computer reset button (or in the
case of the Spectrum 48K, turn off the power and boot up the system again) and
call up the catalogue - enter CAT 1. You'll see that your snapshot file is
labelled "Snap A/B/C" etc, with the letter of the alphabet dependent upon the
file's position in the directory. Clearly it will be difficult to remember the
precise contents of your snapshot file if this were the only name possible. So
you'll need to give your snapshot file an identifiable file-name. First,
choose a new name for the file you have snapshotted and then rename it using
the ERASE ... TO keywords. (In case you've forgotten how to do this, refer
to the section RENAMING A FILE). Use a capital D in the syntax operator, so
that the new catalogue is automatically displayed.

To reload the snapshot files, you enter:

        LOAD D1 "Your new file-name" S          (for a 48K file)
        LOAD D1 "Your new file-name" K          (for a 128K file)
        LOAD D1 "Your new file-name" SCREEN$    (for a screen file)

The S, K and SCREEN$ identifiers are important, and without them the programs
will not load. (If you are using Microdrive syntax, you will also need to type
in the correct identifier at the end of the LOAD command for snapshot files.)



Abbreviated Syntax

Now that you've learnt the basic disk drive commands, we can introduce you to a
much easier way of loading a file. You can enter just:

        LOAD p6

                                27

This has the effect of loading the program labelled number 6 in the directory.
This command will be particularly useful when loading a code file. Normally
you would have to type, for example:

        LOAD D1 "music" CODE 40300,1750

- stating the start address and the number of bytes used. But using the
abbreviated syntax, you can simply enter:

        LOAD p4

MERGE and VERIFY can also be used with the program number in this way.

Using the "p" command, you do not need to type S, K, or SCREEN$ in order to
load snapshot files.


Wild-Card files

Wild-card files allow you to CATalogue, copy (using the SAVE ... TO syntax), or
ERASE a group of similar files in a single operation. Let us imagine, for
example, that you have a series of files called:

        numbers1, numbers2, numbers3, numbers4

To erase all of them, you could enter:

        ERASE D1 "n*"

The effect of the star is to say that all the rest of the file-name doesn't
matter: you wish to erase all files commencing with "n". Be careful: this
really means all files beginning with "n".

You could also enter:

        ERASE D1 "??mb*"

                                28

You would then erase all the files which have "mb" as their third and fourth
letters. The effect of each question mark is to say that "this letter is of no
significance".

The same syntax - using ? and * - is available for the SAVE ... TO and
CATalogue commands. Thus, if you wanted to copy all the files on disk 1 to
disk 2, you could enter:

        SAVE D1 "*" TO D2

Or, if you wanted to copy your "numbers" files to drive 2 and also give them a
new file-name, you could enter:

        SAVE D1 "numbers*" TO D2 "figures*"

(Note that if you are using wild-cards, the new file-name must have the same
number of letters as the first - in this case seven letters.

Also note that when you copy files, whether from one disk to another or to the
same disk, it is not possible to copy a snapshot file. This precaution is
necessary in the interests of the software houses, who would not wish to
support a device which could encourage commercial piracy. It is possible, of
course, to take a second snapshot of the same file.)


The Inhibit Button

You may find that you have a peripheral which appears not to work with the
Disciple. This may be because the peripheral in question has its own ROM and
there is interference between the ROM on the Disciple, and that on the
peripheral. (This is the case, for example, when you use Interface 1 with the
Disciple.) In these cases, follow this procedure:

1.   With the power off, attach the peripheral behind the Disciple. Keep the
disk drive attached and make sure you have a system disk ready.

2.   Turn the power on and load in the Disciple's operating system by entering
RUN. You can load a program from disk if you want to.

                                29

3.   Press the Inhibit Button once, so that it is locked in; this gives you the
capability of switching off the Disciple's operating system. To actually turn
off the system, enter OUT 31,0. You can now no longer use your disk drive
(although the Disciple's printer and joystick ports remain active), but you
will probably be able to use your peripheral. If now, for example, you entered
CAT 1 with Interface 1 and a Microdrive attached behind the Disciple, you would
display the Microdrive's directory, not the Disciple's.

4.   When you wish to use the Disciple's disk drive again, you can either press
the Inhibit Button again (so that it is no longer latched in), or you can enter
OUT 31,16. You can then continue to use the Disciple in the normal way. So, if
you have loaded a program from Microdrive into the computer, you could now save
it to disk, with either the SAVE command, or with the Snapshot Button.

(Programmer's note: You can use OUT 31,0 and OUT 31,16 in your programs to turn
the Disciple's DOS on and off. See List 1 in Appendix A.)


Formatting New Disks

Before a floppy disk is used for the first time, it must be formatted. You can
also format a previously used disk; the effect will be to wipe the disk clean
of information.

You must therefore be careful not to format a disk which contains any files you
wish to keep. It is also risky to format a disk while you are holding a
program in the Spectrum's memory. (This is because the format command uses
approximately 8000 bytes of Spectrum memory from address 49152 upwards. Any
program residing here will be overwritten with format information.)

To format, insert the disk in drive 1 or 2 and enter:

        FORMAT D1 (or D2)       - for double density format, or
        FORMAT SD1 (or SD2)     - for single density format.

It is good practice to ensure that you always have spare formatted disks when
you start work; then, if you fill your original working disk, you can easily
substitute a spare disk without interrupting your program to format.

                                30

After formatting a new disk, it is always a good idea to copy the Disciple's
system file onto it, so that you always have a spare system disk available.
You can do this by entering:

        SAVE D1 "Sys 3b" CODE 0,6656

If you are using two disk drives, the following command is available:

        FORMAT D1 TO 2

This command formats the disk in drive 1 and copies the contents of the disk in
drive 2 to the disk in drive 1, sector by sector. BE VERY CAREFUL NOT TO
FORMAT THE WRONG DISK. Remember that the first-named disk is always the one
which is cleared of data, and the second-named whose contents are copied.
Because the copying is done a sector at a time, the copying process takes much
longer than when you use the SAVE ... TO command; but the FORMAT ... TO command
will give you a new disk which is identical in every respect to the one which
has been copied.


Care of your Disks

Your floppy disks are valuable, not only because of the information they hold,
but also because of the time you have spent creating them. Make these safety
procedures a habit:

        - Return the disk to its envelope when not in use.

        - Remove disks from the drive before you turn power off; don't insert them
        in the drive until you have turned power on.

        - Don't write on the disk jacket or label with a pencil or a ball-point
        pen. Use a felt tip.

        - Don't expose the disk to direct sunlight or heat.

        - Heat and contamination from a carelessly dropped cigarette ash can
        damage the disk.

                                31

        - Don't touch or attempt to clean the disk surface.

        - Replace storage envelopes when they become worn, cracked, or distorted.


Error Reports

There are a number of standard Spectrum error messages which will appear on
screen if the command you have typed in cannot be obeyed. For full details,
consult the Spectrum manual.

When you are using the Disciple, these standard error messages may continue to
appear, but there are some additional error reports which refer specifically to
disk handling problems. These are some of the more important you may meet:

    FORMAT DATA LOST

    This means that the disk has been damaged or the file has been corrupted -
    perhaps by a magnetic field. You will not be able to access the current
    file, and other files may also have been lost.

    When this message appears, copy any remaining files on the disk to another
    disk immediately. You could then try reformatting your disk, and if there
    is no permanent damage you may be able to use it again. But don't store
    important files on this disk, in case the damage is more permanent.

    SECTOR DATA LOST

    This means that the information you've tried to save has been corrupted -
    perhaps again by electrical or magnetic interference while saving. You'll
    need to rewrite the file and save it again. This shows the importance of
    always making a back-up copy of your files.

    The disk itself has not been damaged and need not be reformatted.

    If the Sector Data or Format Data Lost messages appear regularly, this may
    indicate a problem with your disk drive. The head(s) may be dirty, or the
    drive may not be centring the disks correctly on insertion. The first

                                32

    action to take would be to clean the heads using the drive cleaners
    supplied by your local dealer. If this fails, repairs may be necessary.

    DISK WRITE PROTECTED

    You cannot save, erase or otherwise modify files on this disk because you
    have covered the security lock on the right-hand side of the disk with the
    label supplied when you buy the disk.

    NO DISK IN DRIVE

    Check that the disk has been correctly inserted. (Is it the right way up?)
    If it has, there is likely to be something wrong with the drive itself, or
    you may have an incompatible peripheral attached.

    DISK DIRECTORY FULL

    Either you are trying to save more than 80 files on one disk; or, if you
    have used fewer than 80 files, there is simply no more space available on
    the disk for new data. Save your file on a new disk.

    When a file save cannot be completed, the Disciple frees the disk space
    used for the file up to that point; so you can still use the first, limited
    capacity disk for smaller files.

    FILE NOT FOUND

    You are trying to load, copy, verify, erase, or rename a file which is not
    present on the disk. Check that you have typed in the file-name correctly.
    (Make sure you have remembered the 'S' if you are loading a Snapshot file.)

    INVALID STATION NUMBER

    When using the network, you have typed in a station number beyond the
    permissible range 0-63. Or, if you are a pupil station, you are trying to
    identify yourself as the master machine - station 1. (See the section on
    Networking for further details.)

                                33

USING JOYSTICKS

There are two Atari-type joystick ports on the Disciple, one on the left as you
look at the computer from the front with the Disciple attached, and the other
on the right. If you are using only one joystick, you must always connect it
to the right-hand port (as Figure 1).

When you load commercial software programs, you are normally asked to select
either Kempston or Sinclair (Interface 2) compatibility. When using the right-
hand joystick port you can select either Kempston or Sinclair modes. When
using the left-hand joystick, you can only select Sinclair mode.

Once connected, the joysticks are operational immediately.

Occasionally, you may encounter a game which appears not to work with the
joystick in the Kempston mode. It this is the case, select the "keyboard"
control option from the menu at the beginning of the game instead of the
Kempston option. Then, when you are asked to press the keys which you wish to
use for Up/Down/Fire etc, move the joystick in the appropriate direction
instead. You will then find that you have full joystick control.

                                34

USING A PRINTER

One of the features of the Disciple is the ease with which a printer may be
used. Simply connect your Centronics parallel-type printer at the printer
port, set up the appropriate system for the printer (as described in MAKING THE
DISCIPLE COMPATIBLE WITH YOUR SYSTEM), and you are then able to operate the
printer using three simple printer commands - LPRINT, LLIST and SAVE SCREEN$ 1.
(COPY SCREEN$ 1 is an alternative to COPY SCREEN$.)

LPRINT and LLIST have exactly the same meaning as PRINT and LIST, except that
instead of making information appear on the screen, they send it to your
printer. To see how they work, set up your system with the printer and enter
the following program:

        10  LPRINT  "This program"
        20  LPRINT  "prints out the character set"
        30  FOR n=32 TO 255
        40  LPRINT CHR$ n;
        50  NEXT n
        RUN

When you run the program, the LPRINT command sends the heading and the list of
characters directly to the printer.

Now enter LLIST - and the listing of your program is sent to the printer.

Then enter LIST to restore the program listing to the screen. Finally, enter
SAVE SCREEN$ 1. Now the contents of the screen are copied (technically,
"dumped") to the printer.

SAVE SCREEN$ 1 is a particularly powerful command. If you've set up your system
to print graphics, you can dump screen pictures to your printer.

(Note one peculiarity of the Spectrum Basic though. If you have written a
program listing on screen, you cannot dump the screen directly to your printer.
First, you have to enter LIST; only then can you enter SAVE SCREEN$ 1 to dump
the listing to your printer. This is hardly a problem - a faster way of
achieving the same result is to write your program, then to enter LLIST.)

                                35

If you have an Epson-compatible printer (or one which understands the control
code ESC * for bit image graphics selection), you will probably be able to use
SAVE SCREEN$ 2. This will allow you to print a double-sized screen dump
sideways down the page on your printer, with the various colours on the screen
interpreted as shades on the print-out.

The Disciple accepts two commands - TAB and AT - which allow you to position
your text at a certain point on the printed line. Enter this statement:

        LPRINT TAB 8; "This line is indented"

Now enter:

        LPRINT AT 4,4; "This line is less indented"

The number in the two commands tells the computer at which character position
on the line printing should begin.

Finally, programmers should note that if a control character is to be sent to
the printer using LPRINT, then you must always precede it with CHR$ 27 (even
when you want to output CHR$ 27). To output CHR$ 27,CHR$ 65,CHR$ 40 you would
enter:

        LPRINT CHR$ 27;CHR$ 27;CHR$ 27;CHR$ 65;CHR$ 27;CHR$ 40

Or, a simpler way would be to enter POKE @ 6,1, as described in Appendix B. It
is then not necessary to precede the control characters with CHR$ 27. When
you've finished, enter POKE @ 6,0.


Snapshot Printing

Uniquely, the Disciple allows you to temporarily halt a program at any point
and to print out the current screen contents. This facility offers exciting
new possibilities to games players. In an adventure game, for example, you can
print out the screen at each new location, gradually building up a complete
picture of all the available screens.

                                36

To experiment with snapshot printing, load a normal commercial program,
preferably a game with good graphics to show the facility at its best. When
you wish to print a screen, hold down the CAPS SHIFT key on the Spectrum and
press the Snapshot Button - in the same way as if taking a snapshot save. As
usual, the program is paused; if you then press key 1 on the Spectrum, you will
send a 32-column screen dump to the printer. If instead you press key 2 on the
Spectrum and you have an Epson-compatible printer (that understands ESC *),
you should be able to send a double-sized screen dump to the printer - just as
if you had entered the command SAVE SCREEN$ 2.

When printing is complete, the program will resume from the point at which you
left it.


Printing from a Commercial Word Processor and other Serious Software

Commonly, commercially produced word processors and spreadsheets have a special
printer driver built into the software to allow you to send your work to a
printer. In some cases, it will be possible to follow the instructions in the
software package to set up the printer driver for your printer, and
increasingly, the major pieces of serious software for the Spectrum are being
modified to allow for printing with the Disciple.

If the software you wish to use does not offer the option of printing with the
Disciple, and you have no success when you try to print, try the following:
  i)  If you are offered the opportunity to define your own printer driver by
      the software package, choose this option and then enter POKE @ 6,1.
      Then, when you've finished your printing, enter POKE @ 6,0. Or, if you
      can get a Basic listing of the program, type these two statements into
      the program at the points where printing commences and ends respectively.
      For example, Tasword II will print successfully with POKE @ 6,1 at
      line 279 and POKE @ 6,0 at line 281. The very powerful POKE @ 6,n
      statement is explained in Appendix B.
  ii) If this fails, contact the User Club - another user may have solved your
      problem.
  iii) Or contact the software house for more advice. (The reason why more and
      more software is now being modified for printing with the Disciple is
      because of user pressure on software houses.)

                                37

NETWORKING

The two network connectors allow computers with the Disciple to communicate
with up to 62 similar computers/Disciples. It is important to note that this
can be a SHARED ACCESS NETWORK with all stations sharing a single disk drive
and printer held at the master station, and with the master computer
controlling all the other machines. This makes the Disciple particularly
effective in a school classroom. Or you can use an INDEPENDENT STATION
NETWORK, in which up to 8 computers, each equipped with Disciple, disk drive
and possibly printer, come together to exchange files.

We refer below to MASTER stations, ASSISTANT stations and PUPIL stations.
 -  A MASTER station is a computer/Disciple which has at least a single disk
    drive (and at most two drives and a printer) attached. In a shared access
    network, there must be a single master station, which controls and can
    override the activities of all other stations, as well as serving as a
    central file source and printing facility.
 -  In any network there can be up to 8 ASSISTANT stations, each of which is a
    computer/Disciple with at least a single disk drive (and at most two
    drives and a printer) attached. Assistant stations are optional in a
    shared access network, and serve as extra banks of memory for the master
    station and extra printing positions.
    In an independent station network, all computers are set up as if they
    were assistant stations.
 -  A PUPIL station is a computer/Disciple with no disk drive or printer
    attached, and which, in a shared access network, shares the drives and
    printers held at master and assistant stations. There can be up to 54
    pupil stations in a shared access network.


Setting up the network

For each computer in the network, you will need to supply a screened cable
(microphone-style) with two standard 3.5mm jack-plugs, one attached at each end
of the cable. (The cables are not supplied because you will know best how long
you need them to be; both cables and jack-plugs are cheap and easy to buy.)

                                38

To link computers in the network, plug one end of the network lead into either
of the Disciple's network sockets on the first computer and the other end into
the nearest Disciple network socket on the next computer. This second computer
can then be connected to a third in the same way, using its other network
socket, and so on.


The Shared Access Network

Link your computers with network leads as described above, and fit the single
master station and (optionally) up to 8 assistant stations with disk drive(s)
and printer(s). All computers at pupil stations must have the Disciple and a
screen.

The master station and assistant stations create their own system files, typing
in the appropriate codes for the drives and printer as described in MAKING THE
DISCIPLE COMPATIBLE WITH YOUR PERIPHERALS. In the section in the system file
on networking, the master identifies itself as the master machine in a shared
access network, and is then automatically allocated station number 1. Assistant
machines identify themselves with station numbers from 2 to 9 - make sure that
each station uses a different number. The system files are then saved for
permanent use on system disks as usual. If, as in a school classroom, the
computers are in fixed positions and you intend to use the network regularly,
you will simply be able to boot up the master and the assistants from their
respective system disks on subsequent occasions.

With their system disks in drive 1, the master and assistants then load their
systems normally by entering RUN.

Without disk drives, pupil stations obviously cannot boot up from a system
disk. Instead each pupil is allocated a station number between 10 and 63.
Then, after each pupil station is turned on, a FORMAT n command is entered.
Station number 10, for example, enters:

        FORMAT N10      (Here and elsewhere, you may use a lover-case "n")

When the Disciple receives this command, it understands that it is a pupil in
the network (from FORMAT n) and that its station number is 10.

                                39

You are now ready to start work with the network. But first, you should note
that no matter which of the network operations described below you are using,
it is never possible to transfer a snapshotted file from one machine to another
across the network. These are the Disciple's shared access network commands:


- The Master sends a file to all stations.

    First the master loads a file from disk using the normal command:

        LOAD D1 "file-name"

    Pupil stations indicate that they are ready to receive a file; each must
    enter:

        LOAD N0

    0 indicates that this is a broadcast command. The master then enters:

        SAVE N0

- A Pupil or Assistant sends a file to all stations.

    A current file held at a pupil or assistant station can be
    broadcast in the same way. All receiving stations enter:

        LOAD N0

        Then the station holding the file to be broadcast enters:

        SAVE N0

- The Master or Assistant sends a file to one station.

    Again, the master first loads the file from disk. Then to send to, say,
    station 11, the master enters:

        SAVE N11

                                40

    And to receive the file, station 11 replies to the master - station 1 - by
    entering:

        LOAD N1

- A Pupil or Assistant sends a file to anther Pupil or Assistant station.

    A pupil or assistant station can send its current file, identifying the
    number of the receiving station. For example, to send to station 50, the
    sender enters:

        SAVE N50

To receive the file, station 50 replies. If the sender is station 15, the
command is:

        LOAD N15

By now you will have understood the principle that there must be an exchange of
messages between sending and receiving stations before files can be transmitted
across the network. But this is only true if the station receiving the message
is a pupil or an assistant. The master station does not need to reply to
messages from assistants or pupils, as shown in the next batch of network
commands.

- A Pupil inspects the directory on the master disk.

    The pupil station enters:

        CAT 1

- A Pupil loads a file from the master disk.

    The pupil station enters:

        LOAD D1 "file-name"

                                41

- A Pupil sends a file to the master disk.

    The Pupil enters:

        SAVE D1 "file-name"

    It is good practice for the pupil stations to include a station identifier
    (perhaps their station number) within the name of the file that they are
    sending to the master disk; otherwise it will be difficult to establish
    which station was responsible for each of the files on the master disk.

The master station is also able to "steal a screen" from a pupil station, in
order to inspect the work being done at that position. The master can also
force a file upon any pupil station. For these operations, a special F command
is used, and the pupil stations do not need to send a message back to the
master.

- The Master "steals a screen" from a Pupil station.

    To check on progress being made at pupil station 15, the master enters:

        LOAD F15 SCREEN$

    Work at station 15 will be halted temporarily while the screen is
    transferred to the master's screen. When the LOAD is complete, work at the
    pupil station can continue.

- The Master forces a program upon a Pupil station.

    To force its current file upon pupil station 20, the master enters:

        SAVE F20

    When a file is forced upon a pupil station, the current file held at that
    station is lost.

                                42

When the network is in use, pupil stations cannot erase flies or use the "p"
command for LOADing; but the master and assistant stations can continue to use
the standard Disciple disk commands - CAT, SAVE, VERIFY, LOAD, ERASE,
ERASE..TO, SAVE..TO - normally. Master and assistant stations can also
continue to use the snapshot button for saving and printing, and send the
normal Disciple commands to the printer. So:

- To print out work done at a Pupil station.

    First send the file back from the pupil to the drive at the master station
    (use SAVE D1 "file-name"). Then the master station can load the file and
    LLIST, LPRINT, or SAVE SCREEN$ 1 (or 2) as required.

    Or, after stealing a screen from a pupil station, the master can use the
    Disciple's snapshot printing facility to do a screen dump.

If a station tries to access a disk drive while another station is already
using it, or to communicate with a station already engaged in a network
operation, the Disciple will allow the first task to be completed before the
second commences; there will be a short waiting period for the second station
but it is not necessary to repeat the command. Pupils will know that their
network task has been completed when the OK message appears on their screens.
Should two stations try to communicate with another computer or access the same
disk drive at the same instant, priority will be given to the computer with the
lowest station number.


The Independent Station Network

This is a network in which up to 8 stations act as independent units, equipped
with their own disk drives and perhaps printers, but choose to be linked
together for the transfer of files.

Set up each station as described in Setting up the Network. Each computer will
need to create its own system file, following the instructions in MAKING THE
DISCIPLE COMPATIBLE WITH YOUR SYSTEM. When dealing with the section on
networking in the system file, all computers will state that they are not the

                                43

master machine in a shared access system, but they may wish to type in a
station number from 2 to 9, which will then be stored permanently on their
system disks.

Each computer loads the system file by entering RUN with the system disk in
drive 1. If you have set your station number in the system file, you are ready
to join the network immediately. If not, you should now enter a FORMAT N
command with your station number. If you are station 4, you enter:

        FORMAT N4
(In an independent station network, you must load your system file before you
enter the FORMAT command. Be careful not to enter a FORMAT D rather than a
FORMAT N command, or you may find that you've formatted a disk instead of
setting up a station.)

You can now transfer files as follows:

- Send a file to all stations.

    The sender first loads the file from his disk, in the normal way.
    Meanwhile, in preparation to receive the file, the other stations enter:

        LOAD N0

    The sender then enters:

        SAVE N0

    0 indicates that the file is to be broadcast to all stations.

- Send a file to one station

    After loading the file from his disk, the sender types a command including
    the number of the receiving station. For example, to send to station 4, he
    enters:

        SAVE N4

                                44

The receiving station has to identify the sender's station number. If the
sender is station 3, he enters:

        LOAD N3

All standard Disciple commands for disk and printer operation may also be
used in an independent station network; but the additional network commands
described in The Shared Access Network above are not available.

                                45

USING OTHER PERIPHERALS

Most other Spectrum peripherals can be connected to the Disciple via the
through port at the back of the unit.

In the rare cases when peripherals may not work with the Disciple, try
disabling the disk operating system, as described in the section The Inhibit
Button. This will solve most problems, although the mice and midi interfaces
that we know of are currently incompatible. We regularly discuss any
incompatibility problems that arise with hardware and software manufacturers
and will always attempt to find solutions - though they will not always be
instant. In fact, in the coming months, it is hoped that we will be able to
produce a mouse environment for the Disciple if there is sufficient demand.
Details of our progress will be reported in the Disciple Users' Group
newsletter.

                                46

ADVANCED USER'S SUPPLEMENT

In this section of the manual, we describe:

   - Advanced Disciple syntax                   (Appendix A)
   - Details of Disciple POKE @ statements to change system variables
                                                (Appendix B)
   - An introduction to Disciple command codes  (Appendix C)
   - Technical specifications                   (Appendix D)

Much of this information may be difficult for an inexperienced user to
understand. We recognise also that the truly advanced user - the programmer
and the hardware designer - may need more information than we are able to
include here.

Whatever reason you may have for needing extra information - whether it is to
catch up on general background reading or to discover the detailed inner
workings of the Disciple - we'd like to recommend membership of INDUG, the
Independent Disciple Users Group, which can be contacted at 34 Bourton Road,
Gloucester GL4 0LE, England. INDUG publishes a regular newsletter, FORMAT,
helping with problems and queries of ail types, as well as providing a number
of other services to Disciple users.

                                47

APPENDIX A: ADVANCED DISCIPLE SYNTAX

Reading from and Writing to a Sector

        LOAD @ D,T,S, Address
        SAVE @ D,T,S, Address

This command is used for reading from or writing to a specified track and
sector on the disk to a memory location in the Spectrum memory area, where:

        D = the drive number (type either 1 or 2 - the number only, not the D)
        T = the track number from 0 to 39  (40 track)
                or                0 to 79  (80 track)
            To read the second side on a double-sided disk drive
                then            128 to 167 (40 track)
                or              128 to 207 (80 track)
        S = the sector number - from 1 to 10
        Address = the start address of any location in the Spectrum memory.
                  Nb: if a single density disk is read, 256 bytes will be
                  used, and in double density, 512 bytes will be used.

Working with a monitor program, this powerful command allows you to access a
single sector on the disk from Basic. This will be useful if, for example, you
wish to examine and correct a corrupted sector on the disk (and incidentally
the Disciple's Sector Data Lost error message tells you the corrupted track and
sector number); or for breaking into, examining and modifying a snapshot file.

Using Streams and Channels

  i)    OPEN #S; D1 "file-name" IN or OUT

  This command is used to open a file on the disk and attach a stream number to
  it, so that you can PRINT out to or INPUT from that stream, where:

        S = Stream number - from 4 to 16 (type the number only)
        D = D1 or D2 (drive number - type D as well as the drive number)
        IN =  When you specifically require an input or read file opened
        OUT = When you specifically require an output or write file opened.

                                48

The Disciple's OPEN # command differs from the Interface 1 command with the
addition of the IN and OUT statements. However, if you choose not to specify
the IN or OUT, them the default is the same as Interface 1: an input file if
the file-name is found in the directory, and an output file if the file-name
is not found in the directory.

You can also use:

        OPEN #S;"m";1;"file-name"

- for Interface 1/Microdrive compatibility.

Files created with the OPEN # statement are identified as OPENTYP files in
the catalogue.

ii)     CLOSE #*S

This command closes the file and the stream opened in the previous command.
Here, S = Stream number. If you do not type in the stream number, then all
current open streams will be closed.

The * in this command is used to fail syntax, correcting the bug in the
Spectrum ROM, and must be used. If you are using programs originally written
for Microdrive with the Disciple, you will have to add the * to any CLOSE #
statements.

This is an example of a write file:

        10      OPEN #4;D1 "Test" OUT
        20      PRINT #4; "This is a test"
        30      CLOSE #*4

        100     OPEN #4;D1 "Test" IN
        110     INPUT #4;A$
        120     PRINT A$
        130     CLOSE #*4

                                49

NOTE that:
  a) You can only open output files to one disk drive at a time.
  b) You can open input files from more than one disk drive at a time.
  c) You can have as many open files as there are streams available.

iii) MOVE is a command which moves a file, one sector at a time, to either
another file or a stream. (It differs from the Interface 1 MOVE command;
with the Disciple, there is no need to OPEN a file before MOVEing from file
to file.)

        MOVE D1 "file-name" TO #S

This command reads the file and outputs it to the specified stream, (where D1
= D1 or D2, and S = the stream number, from 4 to 16.)

        MOVE D1 "file-name" TO D1 "file-name"

This command reads the file and writes it to the second file.


iv)     CLEAR #

This command clears all streams and channels that may be open.


v)      CLS #

This command clears the screen and attribute area, and resets BORDER, PAPER,
INVERSE, BRIGHT, OVER and FLASH.


The Execute File

An execute file is a machine code file occupying up to one sector length (510
bytes) of memory. When loaded from disk it is executed (RANDOMIZE USR) in the
DRAM, and not in the Spectrum memory as other files are. An execute file gives
the programmer the ability to execute utility routines - such as renumbering a
program - without affecting or using the Spectrum memory.

                                50

To save a sector length of memory as an execute file, enter:

        SAVE D1 "file-name",I,Address

- where:
        D1 = D1 or D2 (drive number)
        I  = the execute file identifier - simply type X
        Address = the location in the Spectrum of the machine-code program.
                  Note that the program must be able to run at address
                  1BD6 Hex or 7126 Decimal, and that any calls to the
                  Spectrum ROM must be done by RST 10H, DEFW (ROM Routine)

To load the execute file and run it internally in the Disciple DRAM area,
enter:

        LOAD D1 "file-name" I
  or    LOAD p(n)               (in other words, the normal abbreviated
                                 syntax for LOAD.)

After execution, control is returned to the user program.

                                51

APPENDIX B - THE POKE @ COMMAND

The POKE @ command allows a value between 0 and 255 to be stored in the
variables area of the disk operating system (GDOS). POKE @ statements can
either be entered while work is in progress, to effect temporary changes to the
system variables, or written directly into Basic program listings to cause
changes every time the program is run. By reading through the descriptions of
the first few POKE @ commands, you will quickly see how they can be used.

POKE @ 0,n      (n = 0 to 8)            [RBCC]    default 7

The border colour change occurs essentially every time a sector is read from or
written to the disk. This variable is ANDed with the sector value, then output
to the screen border.
   If 0 is chosen, no border color change will occur.
   If 7 is chosen, all sectors will change the border colour.

Therefore, if you originally set up your "system" file to allow flashing
borders, but wish temporarily to stop the flashing, you can enter POKE @ 0,0;
this would avoid the need to make a permanent change to your system file.

POKE @ 1,n      (n = 40 or 80 + 128)    [TRAKS1]  default 208

This variable holds the number of tracks and whether double or single-sided for
disk drive one.

POKE @ 2,n      (n = 40 or 80 + 128)    [TRAKS2]  default 208

This variable holds the number of tracks and whether double or single-sided for
disk drive two.

POKE @ 3,n      (n = 0 to 255)          [STPRAT]  default 6

This variable allows you to set the GDOS for the different step rates of drives
(usually 12 to 30 milliseconds). The step rate is not allowed to go lower than
6 milliseconds.

                                52

POKE @ 4,n      (n = 0 to 63)           [NSTAT]   default 1

This variable sets the network station number. Remember that numbers are
reserved as follows:

        0       = network off
        1       = master station
        2-9     = assistant stations
        10-63   = pupil stations

POKE @ 5,n      (n = 0 to 255)          [WIDTH]   default 80

This variable sets the number of characters allowed per line when using LPRINT
and LLIST with the Centronics printer port.

POKE @ 6,n      (n = 0 or 1)            [PCODE]   default 0

If the setting is 0, then the printer driver looks for attribute codes such as
TAB and AT within LPRINT and LLIST commands.
If the setting is 1, then the printer driver outputs directly to the printer
the absolute value of the code 0 to 255. This is essential for sending control
codes to the printer. E.g:
        POKE @ 6,1: LPRINT CHR$ 27; CHR$ 65: POKE @ 6,0

The POKE @ 6 statement will often need to be written into programs for serious
applications - word processors, spreadsheets, etc - to allow codes embedded in
the software to be sent directly through to the printer without interference
from the Disciple. See page 37 for details of POKE @ 6 with Tasword II.

POKE @ 7,n      (n = 0 to 255)          [LSPCE]   default 12

This variable sets the printer line feed in increments of n/72 of an inch
during graphics printing.

POKE @ 8,n      (n = 0 to 255)          [LFEED]   default 1

This variable sets the number of line feeds automatically executed by the
printer driver after a carriage return.

                                53

POKE @ 9,n      (n = 0 to 255)          [LMARG]   default 0

This variable sets the number of spaces inserted automatically by the printer
driver after a carriage return. It is used for left-hand margin control.

POKE @ 10,n     (n = 0 or 1)            [GRAPH]   default 1

If the setting is 1, the printer driver generates the graphic representation of
#, # and ) on LPRINT and LLIST statements.
If the setting is 0, the normal printer character is output.

POKE @ 11,n     (n = 0 or 1)            [ZXPNT]   default 0

If the setting is 0, then GDOS uses the Centronics printer port.
If 1, then the printer channel is unchanged by GDOS. It is assumed that you
are using a serial printer with Interface 1 or the ZX printer attached at the
through connector.

POKE @ 14,n (and POKE @ 15,n)   (n = 0 to 65536)   [DNERR]
                                        default 0

If the setting is 0, then GDOS returns to the Spectrum on errors which do not
relate to hook codes or GDOS syntax statements.
If an address is poked into these two locations, it makes a call indirectly to
this address for further syntax checking. Necessary when adding extra commands
to the syntax.

                                54

APPENDIX C - DISCIPLE COMMAND CODES

The command codes are used in machine code routines to effect control of the
disk subroutines, enabling serious programmers and software houses to directly
drive the disk unit for their own purposes.

When using Sinclair hook codes or command codes and an error is found - e.g.
disk full or bad sector, then a return is made with the carry flag set and the
register "A" holding the error number for interpretation by the calling
routine.

The command codes recognised by the Disciple are as follows:


        HXFER           33h
        OFSM            34h
        HOFLE           35h
        SBYT            36h
        HSVBK           37h
        CFSM            38h
        PNTP            39h
        COPS            3Ah
        HGFLE           3Bh
        LBYT            3Ch
        HLDBK           3Dh
        WSAD            3Eh
        RSAD            3Fh
        REST            40h
        HERAZ           41h


HXFER   Transfer the file description and header to the Disk File Channel
33h     Area (DFCA). Register IX must point to the first byte (DSTR1) of
        the user's 24 byte file information area (UFIA). Expect this
        command code to use the registers HL, DE, BC and A. Please note
        that all command codes corrupt register HL.

                                55

OFSM    Open file sector map with the information contained in the DFCA.
34h     11 bytes from NSTR1 are used to set up the file name. A return is
        made with the disk buffer pointer (RPT) set to the start of the
        disk buffer RAM (DRAM).

HOFLE   Open a file. IX must point to the user's file information
35h     area (UFIA). This code combines the functions of HXFER and OFSM,
        also setting the 9 bytes of header information from HD00 to the
        beginning of the file. This header to the file allows the normal
        Load D1 "" syntax to call the file.

SBYT    Save the byte in register "A" to DRAM at the location pointed to by
36h     RPT. If the disk buffer is full, an automatic sector save to disk
        will take place, and there will be an update of RPT and the value
        entered at the beginning of the DRAM.

HSVBK   Save a block of data to the disk where register DE points to the
37h     start of the data and register BC holds the byte count.

CFSM    Close file sector map. This routine empties the DRAM and copies
38h     the header area onto the directory, closes the file, then updates
        the directory.

PNTP    Output the 8 bit code in register "A" to the printer port, after
39h     checking busy status of the printer.

COPS    Copy the screen RAM to the printer in high resolution screen
3Ah     graphics as set up under the graphics control variables.

HGFLE   Get a file from disk. IX register must point to the start of the
3Bh     UFIA. The return is made with the first sector of the file loaded
        into DRAM and RPT pointing to the first byte (usually the header
        information).

LBYT    Load the byte pointed to by RPT from DRAM, and return with it in
3Ch     register "A" and RPT updated. If the buffer is empty, another
        sector is read from the disk. (Be careful: is there another sector?)

                                56

HLDBK   Load a block of data from disk to the memory pointed to by
3Dh     the register DE with the block count in register BC.

WSAD    Write sector at DE. Writes the contents of the DRAM at the track
3Eh     pointed to by D and the sector pointed to by E, and sets the
        pointer to the start of DRAM.

RSAD    Read sector at DE. Reads the sector at track D, sector E into
3Fh     the DRAM, and sets the pointer RPT to the start of DRAM.

REST    Restore disk drive to Track 00. The drive number is taken from
40h     DFCA.

HERAZ   Erase the file on disk with the information contained in UFIA - so
41h     make sure that IX points to this.

                                57

USER FILE INFORMATION AREA (UFIA)

No. of bytes    Name    Description
        1       DSTR1   Drive number (1 or 2)
        1       FSTR1   Program number
        1       SSTR1   Stream number
        1       LSTR1   Device type (D or d)
        1       NSTR1   Directory description (see below)
        10      NSTR2   File name
        1       HD00    File type (see below)
        2       HD0B    Length of file
        2       HD0D    Start address of file
        2       HD0F    Length of file - variables
                                length (Basic)
        2       HD11    Autostart line number (Basic)

24 bytes



        DIRECTORY DESCRIPTION           FILE TYPE
          1   Basic file              0   Basic file
          2   Data array              1   Data array
          3   String array            2   String array
          4   Code file               3   Code file
          5   Snapshot 48K
          6   Microdrive file
          7   Screen$ file
          8   Special file
          9   Snapshot 128K
         10   Opentype file
         11   Execute file

                                58

DISCIPLE COMMAND CODES IN USE - EXAMPLES

These examples show How to use the command codes; firstly to save a code file
from screen memory, then to load it back into screen memory. Please remember
to save your registers before using a command code.

0000           00001  ;**********************
0000           00002
0000           00003  ;Example ONE
0000           00004
0000           00005  ;Save a code file from
0000           00006  ;screen memory
0000           00007
0000           00008  ;**********************
0000           00009
0000           00010         ORG  49000
BF68           00011
BF68           00012
BF68           00013 ;Open file and set header
BF68           00014
BF68 DB21E8BF  00015  SAVE   LD   IX,DSTR1
BF6C CF        00016         RST  8
BF6D 35        00017         DEFB 35h       ;HOFLE
BF6E           00018
BF6E           00019
BF6E           00020  ;Save data block to disk
BF6E           00021
BF6E ED5BFABF  00022         LD   DE,(HD0D)
BF72 ED4BF8BF  00023         LD   BC,(HD0B)
BF76 CF        00024         RST  8
BF77 37        00025         DEFB 37h       ;HSVBK
BF78           00026
BF78           00027
BF78           00028  ;Close the file
BF78           00029
BF78 CF        00030         RST  8

                                59

BF79 38        00031         DEFB 38h       ;CFSM
BF7A           00032
BF7A C9        00033         RET
BF7B           00034
BF7B           00035
BF7B           00036  ;**********************
BF7B           00037
BF7B           00038  ;Example TWO
BF7B           00039
BF7B           00040  ;Load a code file into
BF7B           00041  ;screen memory
BF7B           00042
BF7B           00043  ;**********************
BF7B           00044
BF7B           00045         ORG  49100
BFCC           00046
BFCC           00047
BFCC           00048  ;Get a file from disk
BFCC           00049
BFCC DD21E8BF  00050  LOAD   LD   IX,DSTR1
BFD0 CF        00051         RST  8
BFD1 3B        00052         DEFB 3Bh       ;HGFLE
BFD2           00053
BFD2           00054
BFD2           00055  ;Load header of disk file
BFD2           00056
BFD2 11F7BF    00057         LD   DE,HD00
BFD5 0609      00058         LD   B,9
BFD7 CF        00059  LOOP   RST  8
BFD8 3C        00060         DEFB 3Ch       ;LBYT
BFD9 12        00061         LD   (DE),A
BFDA 13        00062         INC  DE
BFDB 10FA      00063         DJNZ LOOP
BFDD           00064
BFDD           00065
BFDD           00066  ;Load data block to memory
BFDD           00067

                                60

BFDD ED5BFADF  00068         LD   DE,(HD0D)
BFE1 ED4BF8DF  00069         LD   BC,(HD0B)
BFE5 CF        00070         RST  8
BFE6 3D        00071         DEFB 3Dh       ;HLDBK
BFE7           00072
BFE7 C9        00073         RET
BFE8           00074
BFE8           00075
BFE8           00076
BFE8           00077  ;User File Information Area
BFE8           00078
BFE8 01        00079  DSTR1  DEFB 1         ;Drive
BFE9 00        00080  FSTR1  DEFB 0         ;N/A
BFEA 00        00081  SSTR1  DEFB 0         ;N/A
BFEB 64        00082  LSTR1  DEFB 'd'       ;Device
BFEC 07        00083  NSTR1  DEFB 7         ;Screen$
BFED 54727920  00084  NSTR2  DEFN 'Try 1     '
BFF1 31202020
BFF5 2020
BFF7 03        00085  HD00   DEFB 3         ;Code file
BFF8 001B      00086  HD0B   DEFW 6912      ;Length
BFFA 0040      00087  HD0D   DEFW 16384     ;Start
BFFC 0000      00088  HD0F   DEFW 0         ;N/A
BFFE FFFF      00089  HD11   DEFW 0FFFFh    ;Not used

                                61

TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS

Compatibility:          With the entire range of ZX Spectrum computers, including
                        the ZX Spectrum 128K.

Dimensions:             295mm wide x 94mm deep x 27mm high at rear.

Power requirement:      Power is taken from the Spectrum 9 volt line with internal
                        regulation, drawing +5 volts at 200 mAps with 800 mWatt
                        dissipation.

DISK INTERFACE:         Standard SA400 supporting single/double density operation.
                        A BBC Micro type 34-way IDC connector allows connection
                        to 2 disk drives of 3.5" or 5.25" type.

Storage capacity:                       Single          Double
   (formatted)                          Density         Density
        40 track single sided             80K             180K
        40 track double sided            180K             380K
        80 track single sided            180K             380K
        80 track double sided            380K             780K

Data transfer rate:                125 Kbits/sec    250 Kbits/sec

Nominal access and load time       800 mSeconds     350 mSeconds
   of 7K screen load:

Typical access/load time:            1 second       0.5 second

PRINTED INTERFACE:      Standard Centronics parallel.
                        8 bit data output with strobe line.
                        1 bit input on BUSY line.

Connector:              26-way (BBC Micro-type) IDC compatible for 36-way printer
                        connection.

Driver:                 Resident in disk operating system, with standard
                        LPRINT/LLIST commands and high resolution screen and user-
                        defined graphics capability.

                                62

DUAL JOYSTICK INTERFACE:   Kempston or Sinclair standard for single joystick
                        use; Sinclair standard for dual joystick use.

Connector:              9-pin "D" type Atari standard connector.

NETWORK SYSTEM:         Sinclair Interface 1 compatible.

Connectors:             2 PC-mounted Jack sockets - 3.5mm.

Software Driver:        Disk operating system supports file server and shared
                        resource facility.

Part Details
              Decimal    Hexadecimal          In                Out
              -------    -----------          --                ---
DISK            27           1B            STATUS REG       COMMAND REG
                91           5B             TRACK REG         TRACK REG
               155           9B            SECTOR REG        SECTOR REG
               219           DB              DATA REG          DATA REG

CONTROL AND     31           1F          JOYSTICK ONE         CONTROL
 JOYSTICK                               Bit 0   RIGHT     DISK ONE OR TWO
                                        Bit 1   LEFT        SIDE SELECT
                                        Bit 2   DOWN   SINGLE/DOUBLE DENSITY
                                        Bit 3   UP        ROM BANK SELECT
                                        Bit 4   FIRE   INHIBIT SWITCH CONTROL
                                        Bit 5   ------      EXT. SELECT
                                        Bit 6 PRINTER BUSY PRINTER STROBE
                                        Bit 7 NETWORK        NETWORK

NET - WAIT      59           3B       WAIT WHEN NET = 1      --------
BOOT           123           7B            SET BOOT          RESET BOOT

PATCH          187           BB            SET PATCH         RESET PATCH

PRINTER        251           FB            --------      OUT PRINTER DATA

JOYSTICK 2     254           FE          JOYSTICK 2          --------

                                63

DISK CONNECTOR PIN DESCRIPTION

+--------------------------------------------------------+
| +----------------------------------------------------+ |
| |                                                    | |
| | 33 31 29 27 25 23 21 19 17 15 13 11  9  7  5  3  1 | |
| |                                                    | |
| |                                                    | |
| | 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 18 16 14 12 10  8  6  4  2 | |
| |                                                    | |
| +----------------------------------------------------+ |
+--------------------------------------------------------+

Viewed from the back of the Disciple

        Pin
1 to 33 (all odd numbers)       All 0 volts (ground)
         8      Index                    IN
        10      Disk One select         OUT
        12      Disk Two select         OUT
        16      Motor on signal         OUT
        18      Direction of step       OUT
        20      Step pulse              OUT
        22      Write data              OUT
        24      Write gate              OUT
        26      Track 00                 IN
        28      Write protect            IN
        30      Read data                IN
        32      Side select             OUT

                                64

PRINTER CONNECTOR PIN DESCRIPTION

+--------------------------------------------------------+
| +----------------------------------------------------+ |
| |                                                    | |
| | 25  23  21  19  17  15  13  11   9   7   5   3   1 | |
| |                                                    | |
| |                                                    | |
| | 26  24  22  20  18  16  14  12  10   8   6   4   2 | |
| |                                                    | |
| +----------------------------------------------------+ |
+--------------------------------------------------------+

View from side of the Disciple

        Pin
         1      Printer strobe          OUT
         3      Data bit 0              OUT
         5      Data bit 1              OUT
         7      Data bit 2              OUT
         9      Data bit 3              OUT
        11      Data bit 4              OUT
        13      Data bit 5              OUT
        15      Data bit 6              OUT
        17      Data bit 7              OUT
        21      Input busy               IN
2 to 22 (all even numbers)      All 0 volts (ground)

                                65

QUICK REFERENCE

RUN                                     Boots system

Disk operations  (In this guide, D1 could also be D2 or D*; (n) indicates that
                        an appropriate number used in the command.)

CAT 1                                   Displays directory
CAT 1!                                  Displays abbreviated directory
SAVE D1 "file-name"                     Saves file
VERIFY D1 "file-name"                   Confirms save has been made
LOAD D1 "file-name"                     Loads file (except snapshot files)
LOAD D1 "file-name" S                   Loads 48K snapshot file
LOAD D1 "file-name" K                   Loads 128K snapshot file
LOAD D1 "file-name" SCREEN$             Loads screen file
LOAD p(n)                               Loads the program (from its number)
ERASE D1 "file-name" TO "new file-name" Renames a file
ERASE D1 "file-name"                    Erases a file
SAVE D1 "file-name" TO D1 "file-name"   Copies a file
FORMAT D1                               Formats disk in double density
FORMAT SD1                              Formats disk in single density
FORMAT D1 TO 2                          Formats drive 1; copies drive 2 to 1
OPEN #(n); D1 "file-name" IN or OUT     Opens a file; attaches stream no.
CLOSE #*(n)                             Closes a file and stream no.
CLOSE #*                                Closes all open files
MOVE D1 "file-name" TO #(n)             Reads file; outputs to specified stream
MOVE D1 "file-name" TO D1 "file-name"   Reads file; writes it to second file
CLEAR #                                 Clears all open streams & channels
CLS #                                   Clears screen and attributes area
SAVE D1 "file-name"I,Address            Saves sector length memory to disk
LOAD D1 "file-name"I                    Executes file; runs it internally in
                                        Disciple DRAM area
LOAD @ D,T,S,Address                    Reads a specified track/sector to memory
SAVE @ D,T,S,Address                    Writes to specified track/sector on disk
SAVE .. TO, ERASE, CAT can be used with * and ? for wild-card operations.

Snapshot Button + CAPS SHIFT halts program temporarily; allows selection of:
1 - 32-column screen dump to printer   2 - Double-sized screen dump to printer
3 - Screen save          4 - 48K snapshot save      5 - 128K snapshot save

                                66

Printer operations

LLIST                           Prints out a program listing
LPRINT "statement"              Prints out statement
SAVE SCREEN$1                   Prints 32-column screen dump
SAVE SCREEN$2                   Prints double-sized screen dump
LPRINT TAB n; "statement"       Prints statement with tab at position n on
                                current line
LPRINT AT n,m; "statement"      Prints statement at position m on line m


Network commands (x indicates station number; s=sender; r=receiver)

FORMAT Nx                       Sets station number
(Station 1 is master, 2-9 are assistants, 10-63 are pupil stations; station 0
   is reserved for broadcasts. Masters and assistants can set station number
   in their system files.)

Receiving stations: LOAD N0 }   Master, assistant or pupil station sends
Sending station:    SAVE N0 }   current file to all other stations

Station s: SAVE Nr  }           Pupil or assistant sends current file to
Station r: LOAD Ns  }           another pupil or assistant station

(Network commands above can be used in shared access or independent station
networks; those below can only be used in shared access networks.)

Master: SAVE Nr     }           Current master file sent to one station
Station r: LOAD N1  }

Pupil: CAT  1                   Pupil calls catalogue from master disk drive
Pupil: LOAD D1 "file-name"      Pupil loads file from master disk drive
Pupil: SAVE d1 "file-name"      Pupil saves file on master disk drive

Master: LOAD Fx SCREEN$         Master inspects screen from pupil x
Master: SAVE Fx                 Master forces its current file on pupil x

                                67

Thank you for buying the Disciple. To ensure your satisfaction, the product is
guaranteed by Rockfort Products for a period of 90 days from the date of
purchase, subject to the conditions listed below:-

1.   The Guarantee Registration Form must be completed and returned to the
address shown within ten days of the product's purchase. Keep the Repairs
Information Form and the Customer's Copy in a safe place. Also keep proof of
your purchase - your original sales receipt, a dated retailer's branch stamp,
or a copy of your credit card voucher.
2.   The guarantee applies only to the original purchaser and is not
transferable. It is applicable only in the UK.
3.   The guarantee is invalidated if the product is opened, modified, repaired, or
otherwise tampered with by any party other than Rockfort Products, Miles Gordon
Technology or their appointed agents.
4.   Claims under the guarantee should be referred to the dealer from where the
unit was purchased. If this is not possible, contact us directly.
5.   When making a claim for repair under guarantee, you must produce your
completed Repairs Information Form and proof of purchase. Any product which is
not accompanied by proof of purchase will be returned unrepaired to the sender.
6.   Customers are liable for the carriage cost of units returned under the
claims procedure. If posting the unit, please obtain a postage receipt and keep
it safe until you receive the returned product.
7.   If, after we test the product, no fault can be found, we reserve the right
to charge a reasonable fee for testing and returning the unit.
8.   Your repaired product will be returned to you at the address given on
the Repairs Information Form. We will process your repair as quickly as
possible and you should expect to receive your repaired product within 28 days.
If after this time you have not received your repaired product, please
telephone 01-203-0191, quoting the details on the Customer's Copy.
9.   The liability of the company under this guarantee is limited to the cost of
repair or complete replacement (at the discretion of the company) of the
defective equipment.
10.  This guarantee does not affect the purchaser's statutory rights.
NOTE
Pack the product carefully (preferably in the original packing) to prevent
damage in transit; if the product is found on receipt to be damaged as a result
of inadequate packing, you will be responsible for charges to repair such damage.

                                68

Customer's Copy - Please retain this copy in a safe place.

Serial Number (see underside of product)...........  Purchase date ............

Purchased from (Dealer) ....................... Address .......................


Date returned for repair .................... Postal details ..................


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Repairs Information Form - Please complete this form and return it with the
product if it needs repair under guarantee.

Customer's name (CAPITALS) ....................................................

Customer's address ............................................................


Serial number ............................ Purchase date ......................

Purchased from: .............................. Address ........................


Date returned for repair ..........................................

Brief Description of fault (Use a separate sheet if necessary)


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Guarantee Registration form - Your guarantee is only valid if this form
is returned to Rockfort Products at 81 Church Road, London NW4 4BP within 10
days of purchase.
Customer's name (CAPITALS) ....................................................

Customer's address ............................................................


Serial number ........................... Purchase date .......................

Purchased from: ............................ Address ..........................